
--- PDF page 1 ---
1
A Dissection of the Test-Driven Development
Process: Does It Really Matter to Test-First or to
Test-Last?
Davide Fucci, Member, IEEE, Hakan Erdogmus, Member, IEEE Burak Turhan, Member, IEEE, Markku
Oivo, Member, IEEE Natalia Juristo, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Background: Test-driven development (TDD) is a technique that repeats short coding cycles interleaved with testing. The
developer ﬁrst writes a unit test for the desired functionality, followed by the necessary production code, and refactors the code. Many
empirical studies neglect unique process characteristics related to TDD iterative nature.Aim: We formulate four process characteristic:
sequencing, granularity, uniformity, and refactoring effort. We investigate how these characteristics impact quality and productivity in
TDD and related variations. Method: We analyzed 82 data points collected from 39 professionals, each capturing the process used
while performing a speciﬁc development task. We built regression models to assess the impact of process characteristics on quality and
productivity. Quality was measured by functional correctness. Result: Quality and productivity improvements were primarily positively
associated with the granularity and uniformity. Sequencing, the order in which test and production code are written, had no important
inﬂuence. Refactoring effort was negatively associated with both outcomes. We explain the unexpected negative correlation with quality
by possible prevalence of mixed refactoring.Conclusion: The claimed beneﬁts of TDD may not be due to its distinctive test-ﬁrst dynamic,
but rather due to the fact that TDD-like processes encourage ﬁne-grained, steady steps that improve focus and ﬂow.
Index Terms—Test-driven development, empirical investigation, process dimensions, external quality, productivity.
!
1 I NTRODUCTION
Test-driven Development (TDD) is a cyclic develop-
ment technique. Ideally, each cycle coincides with the
implementation of a tiny feature. Each cycle ﬁnishes
once the unit-tests spanning a feature, as well as all
the existing regression tests, pass. In TDD, each cycle
starts by writing a unit test. This is followed by the
implementation necessary to make the test pass and
concludes with the refactoring of the code in order to
remove any duplication, replace transitional behavior,
or improve the design. The cycles can be thought of as
iterations of an underlying micro-process.
Advocates of TDD believe that each such cycle, or
iteration, should have a short duration and that devel-
opers should keep a steady rhythm [1], [2]. The common
recommendation is to keep the duration of the cycles to
ﬁve minutes, with a maximum of ten [3], [4]. Thus TDD
cycles are usually fairly short: we can call them micro-
cycles or micro-iterations to distinguish them from longer
notions of cycle or iteration that underlie lifecycle-scale
processes, such as sprints in Scrum [5].
TDD experts also recommend sticking with the pre-
• D. Fucci, B. Turhan, M. Oivo, and N. Juristo are with the Department of
Information Processing Science, University of Oulu, Finland
E-mail: name.surname@oulu.ﬁ
• N. Juristo is also with Escuela Tecnica Superior de Ingenieros Informaticos,
Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Spain
E-mail: natalia@ﬁ.upm.es
• H. Erdogmus is with Carnegie Mellon University, Silicon Valley Campus,
USA.
E-mail: hakan.erdogmus@sv.cmu.edu
scribed order of the main activities involved: writing a
failing test, making the test pass by adding production
code, and refactoring [2]. Note that we distinguish be-
tween test-ﬁrst and TDD, with test-ﬁrst referring to just
one central aspect of TDD related to the sequencing of
the different activities involved in a typical cycle: writing
of test code precedes the writing of the production code
that the test code exercises.
Generalizing the above characteristics of a cycle in
TDD (length, variation, and order) leads to three basic
dimensions: we refer to them as granularity, uniformity,
and sequencing. These dimensions do not apply just to
TDD but to any cyclic or iterative process. In particular,
it applies to several variants that differ from the text-
book version in one or more dimensions. Jeffries et
al. [1] see idealized TDD as the endpoint of a step-
wise progression from a traditional, monolithic approach
towards a modern, iterative one along these dimensions
. This progression creates a continuum of processes and
gives rise to several viable variants of TDD, such as
incremental test-last (ITL) development [6]. 1
Granularity refers to the cycles length, whereas unifor-
mity to their variation, i.e., how constant the duration of
the cycles is over time. Granularity and uniformity can
be thought of as the tempo and beat in music theory,
respectively.
A peculiarity of TDD is in the seemingly counterin-
tuitive sequencing of the activities associated with each
1. Although TDD can be as well considered an emerging-design
practice, we focus on it as a development technique.
arXiv:1611.05994v1  [cs.SE]  18 Nov 2016

--- PDF page 2 ---
2
cycle: unit tests are written before production code. This
particular aspect constitutes the test-ﬁrst component of
TDD [2]. It is captured by the sequencing dimension.
This aspect is counterintuitive because the normal soft-
ware development workﬂow takes a test-last approach:
traditionally, unit testing follows the implementation.
It is precisely ﬂipping this component from a test-ﬁrst
to test-last dynamic that gives rise to the ITL variant.
Sequencing expresses the preponderance (or lack) of test-
ﬁrst cycles in the development process.
A TDD cycle typically includes an additional activity,
refactoring [2], in which the structure of the code is im-
proved internally without changing its external behavior
detectable by the existing tests [7]. Refactoring may
involve removal of duplication, other design improve-
ments, or replacement of temporary, stub code. At the
end of each refactoring activity, all existing tests should
pass, showing that the intended behavior has not been
affected by the design changes. However, in practice
refactoring is often inter-mixed with other activities, and
as such, it sometimes involves adding new production
code as well as changing existing tests and behavior.
These practical deviations, however, also potentially nul-
lify or reverse the hypothesized beneﬁts [8], [9].
In summary, the process underlying TDD can be
characterized using three main dimensions: granularity,
uniformity, and sequencing. The ﬁrst two dimensions,
granularity and uniformity, deal with the iterative, or
cyclic, nature of this process. The third dimension, se-
quencing, deals with the particular activities and their
ordering within a cycle. The test-ﬁrst nature of TDD
is related to this third dimension. In addition, a fourth
dimension that focuses on refactoring alone captures the
prevalence of this activity in the overall process.
The goal of our paper is to understand, based on
the four dimensions, how the elementary constituents of
TDD and related variants affect external software quality
and developer productivity. We answer the question:
which subset of these dimensions is most salient? This
information can liberate developers and organizations
who are interested in adopting TDD, and trainers who
teach it, from process dogma based on pure intuition,
allowing them to focus on aspects that matter most in
terms of bottom line.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents
the rationale that motivates this study. The settings in
which the study took place are described in Section 3,
and Section 4 presents the study’s design. The results are
presented in Section 5, the limitations are summarized
in Section 6, and related work is reported in Section 7.
The results are discussed in Section 8.
2 B ACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
What makes TDD “tick” has been a topic of research
interest for some time [1], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15].
In 2014, we set out to investigate this topic rigorously in
the context of a larger research project. We had collected
low level data (Section 4.4) about the development pro-
cesses used by our industrial partners. During the study,
in which a test-driven software development process
was compared to an iterative test-last (ITL) process,
professional software developers tackled programming
tasks of different nature (Section 4.5).
We visualized the micro-process underlying the data
collected from our industrial study on a participant-by-
participant basis, as shown in Figure 1. We were looking
for a metric that would help summarize the process data
for each participant in terms of the four dimensions. First
we captured each dimension by a quantitative measure
easily computable from the data. Then we attempted to
combine them into a single TDD compliance metric with
an eye to regress this metric against the main outcome
measures of external quality and developer productivity
to assess its potential inﬂuence (external quality was
equated with functional correctness and developer pro-
ductivity with speed of production). To do this, three
experts independently evaluated each participant’s data
and gave each resulting observation a TDD compliance
score. We then tried to retroﬁt a formula that would
mirror the experts’ overlapping assessments. However,
not all of the dimensions appeared to have an equally
signiﬁcant contribution. Additionally, some dimensions
appeared to have a close association with each other.
This revelation led us to decide to investigate the four di-
mensions individually without attempting to aggregate
them into an ultimate compliance metric.
To accomplish our goal, we decided to use data from
a set of ongoing quasi-experiments (i.e., studies that lack
a control experimental group, and where randomization
could not be applied) comparing TDD with ITL. The
underlying data of this enclosing context had sufﬁcient
variation to allow us to investigate the dimensions of
interest using a continuum of micro-processes rather
than using the usual dichotomy of clearly delineated
treatment and control groups. Thus, this paper is the
result of an overlay observational study on top of an
experimental context. We call it an observational study [16]
because by pooling data from all experimental groups,
we effectively abstract away from them. In fact, we have
no way of directly controlling the dimensions that serve
as factors. The dimensions emerge due to interactions
among several factors. A subject’s assignment to a par-
ticular experimental group with a prescribed process
is only one of these factors. Others possibly include
skill, ability, and motivation. Some factors are unknown.
The dimensions are not binary in that instead of being
present or absent, they are present to varying extents
independent of an assigned treatment. This implies that
the dimensions lend themselves best to a regression-type
analysis rather than hypothesis testing.
Figure 2 illustrates how the data gathered from
subjects in a repeated-treatment design are used in
this study versus in the larger context of the quasi-
experiments. The observations are shared between the
studies. The outcome variables in both studies are exter-

--- PDF page 3 ---
3
Fig. 1: Example visualization of the micro-process underlying the development activities of subjects from a single
workshop run. The data were collected from Run 1 subjects in Figure 2 applying TDD or ITL to a set of programming
tasks. Each row corresponds to a task-subject pair, the subject applying either TDD or ITL to the task (task-technique
assignments are not speciﬁed in the ﬁgure).
nal quality and developer productivity. The sole factor
in the experimental context is the treatment group: ITL
or TDD. In the current study, all the observations are
pooled, and four measures are extracted from each ob-
servation to give rise to four factors, each corresponding
to one process dimension.
Ordinarily, observational studies reveal associations:
their power to reveal causality is limited. However in
our case, there is a difference. The study is overlaid
on top of an experimental context: the factors naturally
occur in the presence of a deliberate attempt to apply
a prescribed process. Similarly the outcome measures,
the dependent variables, are observable as a result of the
experimental context. Variable omission, or unaccounted
confounding factors, is still a concern, but not more than
they normally are in an experimental context.
3 S ETTING
The context of this study is a larger research effort
investigating software engineering practices, including
test-driven development, in industry [17]. This research
initiative involves several industrial partners from the
Nordic countries. Two companies, referred to as Com-
pany A and Company B in the paper, participated in this
study. Company A is a large publicly-traded provider of
consumer and business security solutions. It is based in
Finland, with development centres in Europe, Asia, and
the Americas. Company B is an SME based in Estonia
that offers on-line entertaining platforms to businesses
worldwide. It has development centres in Europe, Asia,
and the Middle-East.
This study analyzes aggregate data collected from
four runs of a workshop about unit testing and TDD
that were conducted at these two companies. In the
unit testing portion of the workshop, we taught the
participants the principles of unit testing and how to
apply unit testing using an iterative process, but based
on a conventional test-last dynamic. In the TDD portion
of the workshop, we introduced how unit testing is
used to drive the development based on a TDD-style
test-ﬁrst dynamic. The workshop runs were held at the
participating companies’ sites. Three of runs were held
at three different sites of Company A (two in Europe
and one in Asia), and one run was held in Company B
at a European site. Each run lasted ﬁve days (eight hours
per day, including breaks) in which interactive lectures
were interleaved with hands-on practice sessions. Some
of the practice sessions focused on the use of iterative
unit testing with a test-last dynamic, which we refer to
as incremental test-last (ITL) . The other sessions focused
on TDD. Each participant took part in a single run of the
workshop and implemented several tasks, designed for
the purpose of the workshop using the techniques that

--- PDF page 4 ---
4
Fig. 2: The observations gathered from participants were divided according to the particular technique used by
distinct experimental groups formed for the original quasi-experiment (not reported in this paper). In the quasi-
experiment, the data were collected from iterative test last (ITL) and test-driven development (TDD) sessions during
four runs. Note that Run 4 had a different structure than the other three in terms of the order and development
method of the tasks used. For the purpose of the study reported in this paper, however, all the observations from
all runs and groups were pooled together, as illustrated under the column labeled ”This Study”.
the participant was taught. We used ﬁve tasks to support
the teaching in a Randori fashion; the remaining three
tasks (see Section 4.5) were implemented in solo mode,
and represent the experimental objects of this study. We
also encouraged the participants to try to apply the
techniques that they learned during the workshop in
their regular work, although we did not collect any data
from these informal practice attempts. The workshop
runs were part of a bigger, ongoing multi-object quasi-
experiment on TDD with a repeated-treatment design.
4 S TUDY DESIGN
In this section, we state the research questions that are
answered in the study. We also elaborate on the choice
of the research method, the constructs of interest, the
metrics used to measure them, the experimental tasks
used, and the data analysis techniques.
4.1 Research Questions
We focus on the following research questions with re-
gard to two outcomes— external software quality and
developer productivity—and four factors corresponding
to the four process dimensions—sequencing, uniformity,
granularity, and refactoring effort.
• RQ-QLTY: Which subset of the factors best explain
the variability in external quality?
• RQ-PROD: Which subset of the factors best explain
the variability in developer productivity?
The notion of external quality in RQ-QLTY is based
on functional correctness, speciﬁcally average percentage
correctness. We do not consider other notions of external
quality, such as usefulness and usability. The notion of
productivity in RQ-PROD is based on speed of produc-
tion, or amount of functionality delivered per unit effort.

--- PDF page 5 ---
5
We also consider how the factors interact with each
other (for plausible interactions) and whether these in-
teractions matter in predicting the levels of the outcomes.
4.2 Method
We collected ﬁne-grained process data from the four
workshop runs to quantify the outcome (dependent)
variables and factors (independent variables). For each
outcome variable, we use regression analysis to explore
its relationship to the four factors and possible interac-
tions among the factors. We also aim to understand the
form of any underlying relationships. To have enough
variability among the process dimensions represented
by the factors, we used pooled data from the four runs,
which mixed the application of TDD and ITL.
In our speciﬁc case, a controlled experiment was in-
feasible since it is not possible to control the factors. In
this regard, this study is neither a controlled experiment
nor a quasi-experiment. No experimental groups (control
and treatment groups) can be created by manipulating
the factors. A priori random assignment of subjects to
factor groups is not possible without such manipulation.
4.3 Outcome (Dependent) Variables
The outcomes under study were external quality, repre-
sented by a defect-based (or dually, correctness-based)
metric ( QLTY ), and productivity, represented by an
effort-based metric (PROD ). To be able to measure levels
of these metrics, we divided the programming tasks
used in the workshop runs into many smaller sub-
tasks. Each sub-task resembled a small user story. A user
story is a description of a feature to be implemented
from the perspective of the end user, and we adopted
this perspective when deﬁning the sub-tasks. Because
the sub-tasks were very granular, they captured the
tasks’ functional requirements with high precision. The
high level of granularity also made it possible to assess
task completion, quality, and correctness on a numerical
scale rather than a binary scale. The user stories were
frozen and known to the subjects upfront: they did not
change during the implementation of the tasks by the
subjects. An acceptance test suite—a set of reference
tests developed by the researchers—was associated with
each user story, with disjoint subsets of acceptance tests
in each suite covering speciﬁc user stories (see Section
4.5 for details). The acceptance tests were then used to
calculate the two outcome metrics, as explained below.
Both metrics, with minor variations, have previously
been used in TDD research [11], [18], [19], [20].
4.3.1 External Quality
The metric for external quality QLTY measures how
well the system matches the functional requirements.
Each user story is expressed as a subset of acceptance
tests. The formula to calculate QLTY is given in Equa-
tion 1,
QLTY =
#T U S∑
i=1
QLTY i
#TUS × 100, (1)
whereQLTY i is the quality of the i-th tackled user-story,
and is deﬁned as in Equation 2.
QLTY i = #ASSERT i(PASS )
#ASSERT i(ALL) . (2)
In turn, the number of tackled user stories ( #TUS ) is
deﬁned, similarly to Erdogmus et al. [11], as in Equation
3.
#TUS =
n∑
i=0
{
1 # ASSERT i(PASS )> 0
0 otherwise (3)
where n is the number of user-stories composing the
task. #ASSERT i(PASS ) is the number of passing JUnit
assert statements 2 in the acceptance test suite associ-
ated with the ith user-story. Accordingly, a user-story is
considered as tackled if at least one of its JUnit assert
statements passes. In particular, an empty implementa-
tion will not pass any assert statements; conversely, a
hard-coded or stubbed implementation may pass one or
more assert statements. In the latter case, a user story
is still considered as tackled since there is an indication
that some work on it has been done. We use an assert
statement as our smallest unit of compliance with the
requirements. This allows us to be able to better high-
light quality differences between observations, relative to
the enclosing acceptance test case. The QLTY measure
deliberately excludes unattempted tasks and tasks with
zero success; therefore, it represents a local measure
of external quality: it is calculated over the subset of
user stories that the subject attempted. QLTY is a ratio
measure in the range [0, 100].
For example, suppose that a subject tackles three user
stories; i.e., #TUS = 3. This means there are three user
stories for which at least one assert statement passes in
the associated acceptance test suite. Say, the acceptance
tests of the ﬁrst tackled user story contains 15 assertions,
out of which ﬁve are passing; the seconds contains ten
assertion, and two are passing; the third also contains
ten assertions, and eight are passing. Then the quality
value of the ﬁrst tackled user story is 0.33; the second
user story has a quality value of 0.20, and the third 0.80.
Therefore, theQLTY measure for the subject is 44%, the
average of the three attempted sub-tasks ( 100× (0.33 +
0.20 + 0.80)/3).
4.3.2 Productivity
The metric for productivity ( PROD ) follows the soft-
ware engineering deﬁnition of “work accomplished, with
the required quality, in the speciﬁed time” [21]. The metric
2. http://junit.org/apidocs/org/junit/Assert.html

--- PDF page 6 ---
6
is calculated as in Equation 4 and is deﬁned as a ratio
measure in the range is [0, 100].
PROD = OUTPUT
TIME (4)
OUTPUT (Equation 5) is the percentage of assert state-
ments passing for a task when the subject’s solution is
ran against the whole acceptance test suite for that task.
It conveys the proportion of the system requirements
that have been correctly implemented. Unlike QLTY ,
this metric is independent of how many of the task’s
user stories the subject tackled. It does not apply the
”at-least-one-assertion” ﬁlter to sub-tasks to guess which
sub-tasks were attempted and select only those tasks.
OUTPUT = #ASSERT (PASS )
#ASSERT (ALL) × 100, (5)
TIME (Equation 6) is an estimate of the number of
minutes a subject worked on a task. It was based on log
data collected from the subject’s IDE.
TIME = tclose−topen
6000 (6)
where t denotes a timestamp in millisecond. Thus
TIME is simply the difference, in minutes, between
the timestamp of closing the IDE and the timestamp
of opening the IDE. If the subject opended and closed
the IDE several times during a run, TIME was cal-
culated as the sum of the all open-close intervals. The
maximum time allocated to a task was ∼300 minutes,
and one minute was the smallest time unit considered.
For example, suppose a subjects implements a task with
a total of 50 assert statements in its acceptance test
suite. After running the acceptance test suite against the
subject’s solution, 45 assert statements are passing. Then
OUTPUT = 100 × 45/50 = 90% . Suppose the subject
delivered the solution in three hours (i.e., TIME = 180
minutes). The subject’sPROD is therefore 0.50, denoting
an assertion passing rate of .50% per minute.
4.4 Factors (Independent Variables)
In order to quantify the levels of the four factors—
granularity, uniformity, sequencing, and refactoring
effort—we decompose the development process applied
by a subject into a sequence of small cycles. A cycle
is delimited by the successful execution of a regression
test suite (the green bar in JUnit). Each cycle in turn is
composed of a sequence of more elementary actions. The
actions form a pattern which help identify a cycle’s un-
derlying type of activity—for example, refactoring, test-
ﬁrst production, test-last production, or test addition.
This type is inferred automatically by a tool [22] installed
in the IDE and using the heuristics devised in Kou et
al. [23]. A cycle also has a duration calculated as the
difference between the timestamps of the ﬁrst and last
actions in the cycle.
An example is shown in Figure 3. In the example,
time ﬂows from left to right, measured in minutes.
Each colored vertical section represents a cycle. The
color encodes the type of a cycle. The width of the
section represents the cycle’s duration. Figure 3 captures
data collected from a single subject during one of the
runs presented in Figure 2. After a ﬁrst test-ﬁrst cycle
(test-ﬁrst production, light blue), the subject wrote tests
(test addition, aqua) without adding new functionality.
New production code was implemented using a test-last
approach (test-last production, violet), and after that the
subject switched to adding new production code using
a test-ﬁrst dynamic (test-ﬁrst production again, light
blue). The majority of the ﬁnal cycles were dedicated
to refactoring (orange).
Having characterized the components of the develop-
ment process in terms of cycle types and durations, we
can now relate these components to the four process
dimensions to determine their levels for a subject-task
pair. Granularity (GRA) is measured by the median of
cycle duration. Uniformity ( UNI ) is measured by the
median absolute deviation (MAD) of cycle duration.
We selected median and MAD, respectively, over other
typical value and dispersion measures because they are
more robust with respect to outliers. Sequencing ( SEQ)
is measured by the fraction of test-ﬁrst cycles, that is, test-
ﬁrst production cycles, which start with a test addition
activity, followed by the addition of production code
in the middle, and end with successful passing of all
tests. Finally, refactoring effort (REF ) is measured by the
fraction of refactoring cycles in the development process.
In refactoring cycles, normally production or test-code is
modiﬁed, but no new test or production code is added.
Table 1 summarizes these four process dimensions rep-
resenting the factors, or independent variables, whereas
Table 2 summarizes the heuristics used by the IDE plug-
in to identify the cycle type according to the underlying
sequence of actions. In the following section, we explain
the computation of the level of each process dimension
and the implications of the chosen metrics.
Fig. 3: Example visualization of a sequence of devel-
opment cycles for a single subject working a particular
task, equivalent to a single row of Figure 1. The width
of each section represents the cycle’s duration and the
color represents the type of the cycle.
4.4.1 Granularity (GRA)
Granularity is measured as the median cycle duration
in minutes. This measure captures the extent of the

--- PDF page 7 ---
7
TABLE 1: Summary of study factors corresponding to the four process dimensions.
Dimension Interpretation Range
GRA A ﬁne-grained development process is characterized by a cycle duration typically between 5
and 10 minutes. A small value indicates a granular process. A large value indicates a coarse
process.
[0, 300]
UNI A uniform development process is characterized by cycles having approximately the same
duration. A value close to zero indicates a uniform process. A large value indicates a
heterogeneous, or unsteady, process.
[0, 149]
SEQ Indicates the prevalence of test-ﬁrst sequencing during the development process. A value close
to 100 indicates the use of a predominantly test-ﬁrst dynamic. A value close to zero indicates
a persistent violation of the test-ﬁrst dynamic.
[0, 100]
REF Indicates the prevalence of the refactoring activity in the development process. A value close
to zero indicates nearly no detectable refactoring activity (negligible refactoring effort). A value
close to 100 indicates a process dominated by refactoring activity (high refactoring effort).
[0, 100]
TABLE 2: Heuristics used by the tool to infer the type of development cycle (from [23]).
Type Deﬁnition
Test-ﬁrst
Test creation→ Test compilation error→ Code editing→Test failure→ Code editing→ Test pass
Test creation→ Test compilation error→ Code editing→ Test pass
Test creation→ Code editing→ Test failure→ Code editing→ Test pass
Test creation→ Code editing→ Test pass
Refactoring
Test editing (ﬁle size changes± 100 bytes)→ Test pass
Code editing (number of methods, or statements decrease) → Test pass
Test editing AND Code editing → Test pass
Test addition Test creation→ Test pass
Test creation→ Test failure→ Test editing→ Test pass
Production Code editing (number of methods unchanged, statements increase) → Test pass
Code editing (number of methods increase, statements increase) → Test pass
Code editing (size increases) → Test pass
Test-last Code editing→ Test creation→ Test editing→ Test pass
Code editing→ Test creation→ Test editing→ Test failure→ Code editing→ Test pass
Unknown None of the above → Test pass
cyclic nature of the development process used. The lower
the value, the ﬁner-grained in general the process is. A
subject with a low GRA value tends to use short cycles,
and completes more cycles within the same time than
a subject with a higher GRA value. We use the median
value rather than the average to reduce the sensitivity of
the measure to outliers. GRA is a ratio measure in the
range [0, 300] because the maximum time allocated for a
task was 300 minutes.
4.4.2 Uniformity (UNI)
Uniformity represents the dispersion of cycle duration,
as measured by mean absolute deviation (MAD).
Uniformity indicates the extent to which a subject was
able to keep the rythm of the development cycles. The
lower the value, the more uniform the cycles were. A
value of zero indicates that all the cycles had the same
duration. UNI (Equation 7) is a ratio measure in the
range [0, 149], and calculated as follows:
UNI =median(| duration(i)−GRA|),i∈ [0,n ] (7)
where n is the total number of cycles.
We use MAD as opposed to standard deviation be-
cause GRA is deﬁned as a median. Again this helps
reduce the inﬂuence of outliers, atypical cycles that are
too short or too long.
4.4.3 Sequencing (SEQ)
Sequencing characterizes the underlying development
process according to the extent to which a developer
adheres to a test-ﬁrst dynamic. It is measured as the
percentage of cycles having type test-ﬁrst. Note that
SEQ does not capture the full nature of TDD, just one
central aspect that has to do with its dynamic.
SEQ (Equation 8) is a ratio measure in the range [0,
100] and it is calculated as follows:
SEQ =
∑n
i=0
{
1 type( i) = test-ﬁrst
0 otherwise
n × 100, (8)
where n is the total number of cycles.
4.4.4 Refactoring Effort (REF)
Refactoring effort (refactoring in short) is measured by
the percentage of cycles likely to be associated with
refactoring activity. A cycle recognized by the IDE tool
to be an instance of successful refactoring activity has
type refactoring .
REF (Equation 9) is a ratio measure in the range [0,
100], and it is calculated as follows:
REF =
∑n
i=0
{
1 type( i) = refactoring
0 otherwise
n × 100, (9)
where n is the total number of cycles.

--- PDF page 8 ---
8
4.5 Study Tasks
The participants implemented three tasks during each
workshop run. The ﬁrst two tasks were greenﬁeld: they
involved implementing a solution from scratch. The
third task was brownﬁeld: it involved extending an
existing system. The third task was more difﬁcult than
the ﬁrst two. We describe each task below.
T ask 1 (Mars Rover) involved the implementation of
the public API for moving a vehicle on a grid. It was sim-
ple and algorithmic in nature, but required several edge
cases to be handled as well as correctly parsing the input.
The task is commonly used in the agile community
to practice coding techniques. The requirements were
described as six user stories, which were later reﬁned
to 11 sub-stories for acceptance testing. The participants
were given the six user stories, the stub for the class
deﬁnition, including the API signature (8 LOC), and a
stub of the JUnit test class (9 LOC). The acceptance test
suite had 89 JUnit assert statements that covered the 11
sub-stories. We allocated four hours for this task.
T ask 2 (Bowling Scorekeeper)required the implemen-
tation of a system to keep scores for a bowling game.
This task is also well known and has been used in
previous TDD studies [24].
Also algorithmic in nature, its speciﬁcation included
13 user stories to be implemented in a speciﬁc order.
Each user story contained an example scenario. The
participants were given a stub containing two classes
(23 and 28 LOC) with the signatures of the methods to
be implemented. A stubbed test class (9 LOC) was also
provided. The acceptance test suite of this task had 58
JUnit assert statements that covered the 13 user stories.
We also allocated four hours for this task.
T ask 3 (MusicPhone) was about extending a con-
cert recommendation system. The system has a tradi-
tional three-tier architecture that mimics a real-world
application (see the task documentation included in the
replication package [25]). We provided the participants
with a partially working implementation consisting of
13 classes, and 4 interfaces (1033 LOC). The existing
implementation included the UI and data access tiers.
MusicPhone does not use any additional frameworks
with the exception of JUnit for unit testing and Swing
for the user interface. The existing part of the task
was developed using the Singleton pattern, which was
explained to the subjects before the start of the exper-
iment. The subjects were also given a cheat sheet of
the architecture before they started working on the task.
The participants were asked to implement three missing
requirements in the business logic tier. They did not have
to modify the presentation tier. These requirements were
later reﬁned into 11 sub-stories for acceptance testing.
In order to implement these requirements, the partic-
ipants needed to understand the existing system and its
architecture. We provided the participants with a smoke
test (38 LOC, 6 JUnit assertions) as an example of the
usage of the existing classes (how to instantiate them
and how they interact).
The ﬁrst requirement was algorithmic, and the re-
maining requirements were more structural in nature.
The associated acceptance test suite consisted of 132
JUnit assert statements, covering the 11 sub-stories. We
allocated ﬁve hours for this task because it was deemed
more difﬁcult than Task 1 and Task 2.
Table 3 shows how the participants were distributed
over the tasks during the four runs of the workshop.
The total number of data points collected over the
three tasks and three workshop runs was 99. After
removing the data points containing missing values, our
ﬁnal dataset consisted of 82 data points (27 for Task 1,
25 for Task 2, and 30 for Task 3).
4.6 Instrumentation
The development environment used by the participants
included Java version 6, Eclipse 4, and JUnit 4. The IDE
was instrumented with the Besouro tool [22] to collect
data about the development cycles.
Besouro’s data were used to calculate the metrics
representing the factors. This tool is capable of recog-
nizing development actions (e.g., creating a test class,
running the unit tests, modifying a method) taking place
inside the development environment and logging them
along with a timestamp. The information is then used
to aggregate a sequence of development actions into
identiﬁable micro-cycles. The cycles are then classiﬁed
as test-ﬁrst compliant, refactoring, or non-test-ﬁrst com-
pliant (with three subcategories: test-last production, test
addition, regression test) according to an expert system
based on the heuristics presented in Kou et al. [23]. This
classiﬁcation gives rise to the type of the cycle used in
deﬁning the factors SEQ and REF . For example, the
following sequence of development actions is classiﬁed
as a test-last production cycle since the production code
was written (and compiled) before the unit test:
• EditAction 1397055646 Frame.java ADD int score() METHOD
bytes: 127
• CompilationAction 1397055689 BowlingGame OK
• EditAction 1397055691 FrameTest.java ADD void testScore()
METHOD bytes: 391
• UnitTestSessionAction 1397055770 FrameTest OK
As another example, the following sequence is clas-
siﬁed as test-ﬁrst compliant, or a test-ﬁrst production
cycle:
• EditAction 1397056134 BowlingGameTest.java ADD void
testScore() METHOD bytes: 126
• UnitTestSessionAction 1397056135 BowlingGameTest FAIL
• FileOpenedAction 1397056152 BowlingGame.java
• EditAction 1397056173 BowlingGame.java ADD int score()
METHOD bytes: 340
• UnitTestSessionAction 1397056176 BowlingGameTest OK

--- PDF page 9 ---
9
TABLE 3: Allocation of the participants to tasks and techniques (ITL indicates iterative test-last).
Company Task 1 Task 2 Task 3
Company A (3 runs) 18 (ITL) 19 (TDD) 21 (TDD)
Company B (1 run) 6 (ITL) 9 (TDD) 2 (ITL) 8 (TDD) 16 (TDD)
In this last example, a unit test for a not-yet-existing
functionality is written ﬁrst. The test fails since there
is no production code that can be exercised by it. The
developer then writes some production code after which
the test passes.
Each development cycle also has a duration derived
from the timestamps (not shown here) of the delimiting
actions. The duration is used to calculateGRA andUNI .
4.7 Subjects
The subjects were software professionals of varying
levels of experience. For the workshops organized at
Company A’s sites, 24 developers signed up, but 22 par-
ticipated in total. In Company B, after 19 initial signups,
17 participated in the workshop. All the subjects except
two had at least a bachelor’s degree in computer science
or a related ﬁeld. The average professional experience
in Java development was 7.3 years (standard dev. = 4.1,
min. = 1, max. = 15 years). Before the workshop, the
participants were asked to state their level of skill in
Java and unit testing on a 4-point Likert scale. Table 4
shows the breakdown of their answers.
TABLE 4: Distribution of the subjects over the four skill
levels for Java and unit testing (in percentage).
Unit testing
None Novice Intermediate Expert
Java
None 2.5 9.5 2.5 2.5
Novice 27 17 9.5 0
Intermediate 2.5 9.5 2.5 5
Expert 0 2.5 2.5 5
Most of the subjects had basic experience with Java
and unit testing. Few subjects (5%) considered them-
selves experts in both Java and unit testing. Fewer
(2.5%) said they had neither skill. No one declared to
be expert unit testers. To sum up, the subject sample
was composed mostly of mid-level Java developers with
basic unit testing skills, but experience and skill still
varied. In order to establish a better baseline and level
the playing ﬁeld, the subjects were given a ﬁve-hour
hands-on tutorial on unit testing principles using JUnit
and a ﬁve-hour training on applying TDD in different
contexts.
4.8 Data Analysis Techniques
Our analysis starts with the characterization of the data
with descriptive statistics. The next step is to look for cor-
relations among the variables. This allows us to evaluate
the redundant information in the factors (independent
variables) and get a glimpse of the associations between
the outcome (dependent) variables and factors. Next
we create multiple linear regression models to identify
the relationship between the outcome variables and the
complete set of factors. Finally, we use feature selec-
tion to create the model that includes only the most
salient factors. For each model we report the effect size
as adjusted R2, which indicates the proportion of the
variance in the outcome variable that the factors are able
to explain. Thus 1− adjusted R2 can be attributed to
unknown factors, or inherent variability in the outcome
variable. As opposed to the p-value, which informs
whether the association is present by chance or not, the
effect size informs about the magnitude of the association.
The soundness of the models is checked by applying the
proper assumption diagnostics. The data analysis was
carried out using R version 3.1.2. with α level set to
.05. The dataset used in the analysis is included in the
replication package [25].
5 R ESULTS
We collected six measures. The main four process di-
mensions (GRA, UNI , SEQ, and REF ) constitute the
factors (independent variables). QLTY , and PROD are
the outcome (dependent) variables.
The dataset includes 82 complete observations. An
observation was considered complete when there were
no missing values for any of the variables over the three
tasks.
5.1 Descriptive Statistics
The descriptive statistics for the dataset are reported in
Table 5. The histogram and probability density of each
variable is shown in Figure 4.
QLTY appears normally distributed, with about 75%
of the observations in the 50-100 range, as shown in
Figure 4e. PROD appears positively skewed and multi-
modal as shown in Figure 4f. Approximately 25% of the
observations are in the 0-0.25 range (min = 0, max =
.86). The shapes of the distribution of QLTY andPROD
are consistent with those of a previous experiment con-
ducted with student subjects [26].
The distributions ofGRA (Figure 4a) andUNI (Figure
4b), variables capturing the cyclical characteristics of the
process, are positively skewed. For both, the majority
of the observations are in the 0-10 interval. The peek of
the granularity distribution is close to the suggested ﬁve
minutes; also the peek and skewness of the uniformity
distribution suggest that the majority of the subjects kept
a consistent rhythm ( UNI = 0 minute indicates that all
the cycles had the same duration).
Figure 4c shows that some subjects, around a quarter,
wrote tests ﬁrst only to some extent (approximately
one-third of the total cycles completed). Subjects in the

--- PDF page 10 ---
10
TABLE 5: Descriptive statistics for the dataset used in the study (n=82).
Statistic Mean St. Dev. Min Pctl(25) Median Pctl(75) Max
QLTY 65.55 19.25 0.00 50.00 66.67 81.67 100.00
PROD .24 .26 .00 .05 .12 .35 .86
GRA 7.93 9.53 .87 2.78 4.36 8.95 48.97
UNI 4.52 9.14 .00 2.43 4.52 8.17 51.32
SEQ 32.79 21.86 .00 16.66 33.33 47.33 87.50
REF 24.39 18.50 .00 8.71 23.07 34.52 71.42
upper quantile wrote test-ﬁrst approximately half of the
time. The distribution of REF is positively skewed, as
shown in Figure 4d. The subjects applied refactorings
approximately one-third of the time on average, but a
quarter of them refactored less than 10% of the time.
This behavior is not surprising as it often happens in
real projects, as was observed by Aniche et al. [27].
5.2 Correlation Analysis
In this section we check for signiﬁcant correlations be-
tween the variables, using the Spearman ρ coefﬁcient
[28]. Spearman’s correlation is a rank-based correlation
measure that does not rest upon an assumption of
normality, and it is robust with respect to outliers.
Table 6 summarizes the correlations among the four
factors. The factors dealing with the cyclical character-
istics of the process, GRA and UNI , are positively cor-
related (ρ = .49, p-value = .0001). The shorter the cycles
tend to be, the more uniform they are, and vice versa.
Another signiﬁcant correlation exists between GRA and
REF , but the magnitude is small ( ρ = −.22, p-value
= .02). Coarser processes appear to involve reduced
refactoring effort, and vice versa.
Table 7 summarizes the correlations among the depen-
dent (outcome) variables and independent variables (fac-
tors). QLTY is negatively correlated with GRA, i.e., the
smaller the cycle, the higher the quality, and vice versa.
The correlation is signiﬁcant ( ρ = −.25, p-value=.02)
and its magnitude is medium [29]. A similar negative
association exists between QLTY and UNI ; the more
uniform the development cycles, the better the external
quality (ρ =−.36, p-value = .01), and vice versa.
Unlike QLTY , none of the factors correlate signiﬁ-
cantly with the outcome variable PROD .
TABLE 6: Correlations among the factors.
The values above the diagonal represent Spearman’s
correlation coefﬁcient; the values below represent the p-
value.
GRA UNI SEQ REF
GRA .49 .11 -.22
UNI .0001 -.11 .01
SEQ .15 .92 -.48
REF .02 .30 .10
5.3 Regression Models
In this section, we explore the relationships between
the four factors and two outcome variables and ﬁnd
TABLE 7: Correlations between the factors and out-
comes. The p-values are reported in parentheses.
GRA UNI SEQ REF
QLTY -.27
(.02)
-.36
(.01)
.12
(.29)
-.11
(.31)
PROD -.20
(.07)
-.25
(.20)
.03
(.81)
-.17
(.11)
optimal models that explain how useful the factors are
in predicting the observed outcomes. We start with a
full model that includes all the factors and employ a
backward elimination approach to ﬁnd the model that
minimizes information loss according to Akaike’s Infor-
mation Criterion (AIC) [30]. Minimizing AIC is preferred
to maximizing adjustedR2 because it favors the simplest
model [30], whereas adjusted R2 can be biased towards
the more complicated model. The initial model we
propose has two high-level components, with possible
interaction within the two high-level components, but
no interactions across them.
• The high-level component CYCLE deals with the
cyclical characterisics of the development process.
This component includes the factors granularity and
uniformity, and the interaction between them.
• The high-level component TYPE deals with the
speciﬁc approach used within cycles. This compo-
nent includes the factors sequencing and refactor-
ing, and the interaction between them.
It is reasonable to assume that CYCLE and TYPE do
not interact because they represent orthogonal higher-
order concepts.
Hence, our model is CYCLE +TYPE , where:
• CYCLE =GRA +UNI + (GRA :UNI )
• TYPE =SEQ +REF + (SEQ :REF )
Here the symbol ”:” denotes interaction between two
factors. Thus we have:
OUTCOME ∼GRA +UNI +GRA :UNI +
SEQ +REF +SEQ :REF (10)
where OUTCOME ∈ [QLTY , PROD ].
The results for this model are reported in Table 8. The
model in Equation 10 is statistically signiﬁcant for both
outcome variables according to F-statistic. The observed
effect sizes (measured by adjusted R2) are considered
small-medium [29], typical for studies involving human
factors [31], [32]. However, the factor coefﬁcients and
interaction terms are all statistically insigniﬁcant at the
givenα-level. The correlations observed between the two

--- PDF page 11 ---
11
(a) Granularity
 (b) Uniformity
(c) Sequencing
 (d) Refactoring
(e) Quality
 (f) Productivity
Fig. 4: Histograms and density curve for the study variables. The x-axis for the histograms of granularity and
uniformity are cut to maximum value of the dataset, instead of extending to the theoretical maximum.
factors GRA and UNI (see Section 5.2) may indicate a
problem of multicollinearity in the models. Although it
does not impact the power of the model, multicollinear-
ity3 has the risk of inaccurate regression coefﬁcients and
p-values [33]. We can assess the extent of such overﬁtting
using the Variance Inﬂation Factor (VIF). VIF indicates to
what extent the variances of the coefﬁcients estimates are
inﬂated due to multicollinearity. A VIF value exceeding
4.0 is interpreted as problematic multicollinearity [34].
The interaction term GRA :UNI exhibits a VIF of 5.53,
which is excessive. For the factors and the other interac-
tion term, we have VIF(GRA) = 3.39, VIF(UNI ) = 1.91,
VIF(SEQ ) = 2 .38, VIF(REF ) = 3 .24, and VIF(SEQ :
REF ) = 2.56, which are acceptable.
3. Multicollinearity results from two or more factors in a model
being signiﬁcantly correlated, resulting in redundancy, and possible
overﬁtting.
Based on these results, we drop the problematic inter-
action factor GRA : UNI from further analysis. There-
fore, we modify the candidate model for QLTY to be:
QLTY ∼GRA+UNI +SEQ +REF +SEQ :REF (11)
5.3.1 Feature Selection
We now investigate whether the model in Equation 11
can be further simpliﬁed by applying feature selection.
Our approach, stepwise backward selection [35], iter-
atively drops the least signiﬁcant variable to form a
new model based on its AIC. The re-inclusion of any
previously dropped variables is considered at the end of
each iteration.
AIC represents the information loss for a given model
relative to the theoretical ideal, unlike the Chi-squared
goodness-of-ﬁt approaches in which the absolute model
ﬁt is assessed [36]. AIC takes into account the complexity
of the model, i.e., the number of variables. As opposed to

--- PDF page 12 ---
12
TABLE 8: Regression summary for the models in Equation 10. Standard error reported in parentheses.
Outcome variable:
QLTY PROD
GRA −.36 (0.19) −5.03e−03 (2.58e−02)
p-value = .65 p-value = .05*
UNI −.62 (.49) −9.96e−03 (6.53e−03)
p-value = .20 p-value = .13
SEQ .002 (.14) −1.48e−03 (1.80e−03)
p-value = .86 p-value = .41
REF −0.26 (.20) −4.91e−03 (2.53e−03)
p-value = .17 p-value = .05
GRA:UNI .006 (.04) 1.57e−04 (1.87e−04)
p-value = .65 p-value = .40
SEQ:REF .001 (.005) 3.60e−05 (7.49e−05)
p-value = .80 p-value = .62
Constant 77.27 (7.14) 0.47 (.09)
p-value = .000 p-value = .000
Adjusted R 2 [conf. int.] .09 [.01, .26] .08 [.01, .26]
Residual Std. Error (df = 75) 18.40 .24
F Statistic (df = 6; 75) 2.42 2.72
p-value .03 .04
R2-based indicators [36], it does not inﬂate ﬁtness after
more variables have been added. Another relative ﬁtness
index that takes into account model parsimony similar
to AIC is BIC [30]. BIC tends to penalize the number of
variables in the model more than AIC. However, unlike
BIC, AIC reaches an asymptotically optimal model under
the assumption that the best theoretical model is not
among the possible candidates [37]. This property of AIC
makes it favorable to BIC in our case: the best model for
QLTY andPROD cannot be constructed using only the
factors measured in this study, and therefore we use AIC
as the basis for the selection criterion. We are looking for
the model with the minimum AIC 4.
Applying backwards selection, after three iterations
we obtain the models presented in Table 9 for QLTY
and Table 10 forPROD . These two models represent the
best compromise between goodness of ﬁt and simplicity
with minimum loss of information.
Both models are signiﬁcant and exhibit an adjustedR2
indicating a medium effect size. Notice that SEQ and its
interaction with REF (SEQ:REF ) have been dropped
from both models. This is surprising as it implies the
sequence in which writing test and production code
are interleaved is not a prominent feature. The ﬁnding
counters the common folklore within the agile software
development community.
The factors related to the higher-levelCYCLE compo-
nent (GRA andUNI ) as well as remaininTYPE compo-
nent (refactoring effort, REF ) are negatively associated
with both outcomes. In the end, the models for QLTY
and PROD involve exactly the same factors.
That refactoring has a negative relationship with both
4. The theoretical best value for AIC is minus inﬁnity.
TABLE 9: Regression summary for the QLTY model
having the best AIC (483.50). Standard error reported
in parentheses.
Outcome variable:
QLTY
GRA −.34 (0.17)
p-value = .04
UNI −.43 (.25)
p-value = .09
REF −.25 (.11)
p-value = .03
Constant 77.70 (4.05)
p-value = .000
Adjusted R 2 [conf. int.] .12 [.01, .27]
Residual Std. Error 17.98 (df = 78)
F Statistic 4.86 (df = 3; 78)
p-value .003
outcome variables seems counterintuitive. One reason
may lie in the metric REF used to measure refactoring
effort.REF may not reliably measure the construct that
it targets, which raises a construct validity threat. This
has to do with the measure’s inability to differentiate
between useful and harmful variants of refactoring. Most
cycles detected as refactoring cycles could have been
associated with ﬂoss refactoring [38], a practice that mixes
refactoring with other activities. A typical example in-
volves sneaking in production code that implements new
functionality while refactoring. The developer is peform-
ing refactoring, realizes that a piece of functionality is
missing and mixes in the proper production code, but
the code is not covered by any tests, possibly causing a

--- PDF page 13 ---
13
TABLE 10: Regression summary for the PROD model
having the best AIC (-239.30). Standard error reported
in parentheses.
Outcome variable:
PROD
GRA −.003 (.002)
p-value = .11
UNI −.003 (.002)
p-value = .08
REF −.003 (.001)
p-value = .02
Constant .39 (.05)
p-value = .000
Adjusted R 2 .10 [.01, .28]
Residual Std. Error .22 (df = 78)
F Statistic 4.14 (df = 2; 78)
p-value .008
feature interaction and introducing a hidden bug. Floss
refactoring is believed to be potentially harmful, nega-
tively affecting quality and productivity. Pure refactoring
cycles are difﬁcult to detect accurately without before-
and-after code coverage comparison, which the process
instrumentation tool we used did not perform.
5.3.2 Assumption Diagnostics
We validate the assumptions for the models by running
the regression diagnostic proposed by Pena and Slate
[39].
TABLE 11: Multiple regression diagnostics for QLTY
model in Table 9.
Value p-value Decision
Skewness 1.93 .16 Acceptable.
Kurtosis .20 .65 Acceptable.
Link Function 1.63 .26 Acceptable.
Heteroscedasticity .10 .74 Acceptable.
TABLE 12: Regression diagnostics for PROD model in
Table 10.
Value p-value Decision
Skewness 7.21 .07 Acceptable.
Kurtosis .81 .36 Acceptable.
Link Function 1.49 .22 Acceptable
Heteroscedasticity 2.26 .13 Acceptable.
As reported in Tables 11 and 12, the models overall
meet their statistical assumptions (p-value > α-level).
When a model includes several factors, partial residuals
plots are helpful in visualizing the relationships between
the factors and the outcome variable one at a time.
Figures 5 and 6 show the Component and Compo-
nent+Residuals (CCPR) plots for the QLTY andPROD
models, respectively. The CCPR plot is a variation of
a partial residual plot where the outcome values and
the partial residuals are plotted against a chosen factor.
The dashed line in each plot represents the ﬁtted linear
model for the corresponding factor. This is the compo-
nent line. The circles represent the partial residuals. The
solid curve is ﬁtted to the residuals using the LOESS
method—a standard, nonparametric method to ﬁt a
curve to a set of observations based on locally weighted
polynomial regression [40]. A systematic departure of
the residuals curve from the component line indicates
a poor ﬁt [41], which does not appear to be the case in
Figures 5 and 6. We observe sporadic local departures of
the LOESS curves from the component lines, especially
at some extremes, but the curves do not ”run away”
persistently.
5.3.3 Interpretation of Models
We brieﬂy interpret the signiﬁcant coefﬁcients in the two
models.
Regarding the GRA coefﬁcient in QLTY (Table 9),
reducing the cycle length further from the often sug-
gested values of ﬁve to ten minutes results in little
improvement. The improvement can be as high as 14%
when cycle length is reduced from its maximum ob-
served value at around 50 minutes down to the average
observation of eight minutes in the nominal range of the
dataset.
With respect to REF coefﬁcient, we have similar
observations, however, we have to qualify them with
the possibility that the detected refactoring cycles might
have been dominated by the harmful variety (further dis-
cussed in the next section), hence the negative coefﬁcient.
Limiting refactoring effort from the average level (23%)
to its ﬁrst quartile mid-point (9%), and similarly from the
third quartile midpoint to the average level, results in
less than 4% improvement in external quality. However,
a reduction from the extreme case (70%) to the average
case results in about 12% improvement.
In the PROD model (Table 10), only REF has a
signiﬁcant coefﬁcient, but again it is subject to the con-
struct caveat of being possibly overrepresented by the
harmful variety of refactoring. Keeping this qualiﬁcation
in mind, doing less refactoring is associated with an
increase in productivity. This observation is not sur-
prising since spending more time on refactoring should
imply spending less time on adding new features, thus
reducing productivity. In particular reducing refactoring
effort from 70% of the time (the maximum observed
value) to the average case in the dataset—a reduction of
∼45%—results in a productivity improvement of 18%.
In summary, the ﬁnal optimal models include the
factors for granularity, uniformity, and refactoring ef-
fort, but not sequencing. They also omit interactions
between these factors. However, at this point the role of
uniformity vis- ´a-vis external quality and of granularity
vis-´a-vis productivity are still uncertain since the corre-
sponding coefﬁcients are insigniﬁcant in the underlying
models, although the models themselves are signiﬁcant.

--- PDF page 14 ---
14
Fig. 5: CCPR plots for model in Table 9
6 T HREATS TO VALIDITY
In this section, we discuss the threats to the validity
applicable to our study following the classiﬁcation by
Wohlin et al. [42]:
1) Internal validity: threats that can lead to a misinter-
pretation of the relationship between independent
and dependent variables.
2) External validity: threats that can limit the appli-
cability of the results to a greater extent, e.g., in
industrial practice.
3) Construct validity: threats that relate to how faith-
fully the measures capture the theoretical con-
structs and how suitably the constructs are oper-
ationalized to preserve their integrity.
4) Conclusion validity: threats that concern the
soundness of the statistical inferences made.
The threats to the validity are presented in decreas-
ing order of priority following the recommendations of
Wohlin et al. [42]. We recognize that there are trade-offs
between the different threats and focus on the types that
are more important for applied research . Therefore, we
give higher priority to the interpretation of the results
and their applicability to relevant populations.
6.1 Internal Validity
By the nature of its design, this is a single-group study.
Therefore, there is no notion of a control group. The
study is subject to single-group threats. The factors, or
independent variables, represent dimensions of applying
a particular type of development process. We are inter-
ested in how the variation in the strength of the property
described by each dimension of the process affects the
outcome measures. The dimensions cannot be controlled,
as they arise naturally from applying a taught technique
on a best effort basis. They are neither all absent nor
all present, but rather present to varying extents in a
continuum. This is the reason this study uses correlation
and regression analysis rather than an experimental de-
sign with deﬁned control and experimental groups. We
noted in the beginning that this study was embedded in
a larger ongoing study structured as a quasi-experiment.
However, the treatment and control groups, TDD and
ITL, deﬁned in that larger context, do not apply to this
study, as we generalized the groups to a higher-level
process in which TDD and ITL are speciﬁc, idealized
cases. We are interested in the elementary dimensions of
that high-level process. We acknowledge the limitations
of our design in terms of causality. Our main goal was
to identify the most salient of those dimensions in terms
of their potential consequences.
History and maturation effects are not a concern for
this study since they apply to all subjects equally. Threats
related to testing and statistical regression to the mean
are not applicable either due to the design.

--- PDF page 15 ---
15
Fig. 6: CCPR plots for model in Table 10
We mitigated the instrumentation threat by using mul-
tiple tasks. Two of these tasks were selected from previ-
ous studies, and a more complex task was introduced
to increase the variation in observations. We needed
observations to be as diverse as possible.
The drop-out rate of 10%, together with 8% incom-
plete or excluded observations, may have eliminated a
relevant subgroup of subjects. This in turn may have
skewed the dataset.
A selection threat exists due to convenience sampling.
Our sample was based on volunteers and company-
selected subjects. Such subjects tend to have different
motivations and incentives different from those of ran-
domly selected subjects. In general, volunteers tend to
be more enthusiastic and motivated. The converse might
apply to company-selected subjects, which in addition
poses a social threat. The skill and experience proﬁles
of the two groups may have been skewed compared
to a random sample. These design choices could have
inﬂuenced the results. However, we needed to accept the
compromises in the selection process because recruiting
professionals is inherently difﬁcult, and when possible,
often subject to selection bias [17].
6.2 External Validity
The participants in the study do not represent the en-
tire population of software developers. Speciﬁcally, their
skills in unit testing was limited. Professional experience
level spanned a rather narrow range skewed towards
the medium- to high-experience end. These two consid-
erations limit the generalizability of the results to sub-
populations with proﬁles that differ from that of the
study.
The tasks consisted of ﬁxed user stories, all known
upfront to the subjects. We acknowledge that this may
not be the case in real world settings. When requirements
may change or not well known, leading the cycles with
tests can provide advantages that were not detectable in
this study: test-ﬁrst can help to understand the require-
ments, discover new/missing requirements, and ﬁnd
and ﬁx requirements bugs.
Two of the three tasks used in the study were artiﬁcial
and not particularly representative of a real-word situa-
tion for a professional software developer. This poses a
threat to the generalizability of our results. To mitigate
this concern and increase realism, we included a third
task, and the three tasks together provided sufﬁcient
diversity and balance between algorithmic and architec-
tural problem solving. The resulting diversity moderated
the threat to external validity.
To minimize the interaction between setting and study
goals, the physical setting was kept as natural as possible
for the participants. The subjects worked at their own
workstations throughout the study.

--- PDF page 16 ---
16
6.3 Construct Validity
The study constructs were well deﬁned, except possibly
for the refactoring dimension. The factors granularity,
uniformity, and sequencing are based on straightfor-
ward, mechanical deﬁnitions, and were accordingly mea-
sured by automated tools with straightforward heuris-
tics. Refactoring effort is more special since the under-
lying construct is difﬁcult to capture, or even deﬁne
clearly. It was measured using an approximation. In the
future, its detection may be made more accurate by more
sophisticated analysis of developer actions—for exam-
ple through before-and-after code coverage analysis to
better differentiate pure refactoring from the potentially
harmful, mixed kind known as ﬂoss refactoring [27]. Since
the corresponding factor, REF , appears in the ﬁnal
regression models, a construct threat arises. In particular,
the role of refactoring in external quality deserves deeper
investigation.
The outcome variables were based on measures used
in previous studies. We had no reason to doubt their
ability to capture the underlying constructs in a rea-
sonable way. The productivity measure was, by design,
intended to capture short-term productivity. Therefore,
given the short duration of the tasks, it is possible that
the participants did not achieve sufﬁcient maturity for
robust measurement. This could suggest an interaction
between maturity and construct validity.
The outcome variables exhibit mono-method bias. We
used a single measure to capture each outcome construct.
For example, the quality measure was based exclusively
on functional correctness. Other important aspects of
external quality, in particular usability and usefulness,
were disregarded. Not triangulating the result with mul-
tiple measures reduces the validity. We are still looking
for alternative, objective, and reliable means of measur-
ing these constructs.
Finally, the factors we studied are directly associated
with only two particular outcome constructs, external
quality and developer productivity. The factors may
also have an association with other important outcome
constructs, such as internal quality (maintainability and
understandability) and ability to deal with volatile re-
quirements. These were not addressed. The factors’ im-
pact on these other constructs can be signiﬁcant, and
thus worth investigating.
6.4 Conclusion Validity
Subject variability was desirable because this was a
regression study. The participants were professionals
from only two companies, therefore our sample was not
very heterogeneous. There were few subjects who were
experts with both relevant skills. The majority of the
participants had to learn the required skills to different
extents during the workshops, which possibly further
reduced variability in the sample.
Skill and experience level are often confounding fac-
tors in experimental designs. Their role in an obser-
vational regression study with no controlled factors is
however less important.
We believe the application domain in which the partic-
ipants worked (security and gaming) was not a concern
either for conclusion validity. The tasks were equally
new and different to all participants.
The assumptions of the statistical tests used were
veriﬁed for all the models. In the ﬁnal models, the
effect sizes—represented by the adjusted R2—fell in the
medium range [29]. This level is acceptable in the study’s
context because human behavior can introduce a great
deal of unexplained variation [32] that may be impos-
sible to account for. We remark that over 85% of the
variation in the outcome variables was still unaccounted
for. However, the study was not focused on those factors;
rather, the goal was to identify the most important ones
among four speciﬁc candidates.
7 R ELATED WORK
The effects of TDD have been extensively studied. The
evidence accumulated is synthesized in several system-
atic literature reviews (Table 13).
Turhan et al. [43] reviewed controlled experiments,
quasi-experiments and case studies of different scales in
both industry and academia. Their results suggest that
TDD overall has a moderate positive effect on external
quality, although this result becomes weaker when only
the most rigorous studies are considered. The results are
contradictory for productivity overall, with controlled
experiments exhibiting a weak positive effect.
A meta-analysis by Raﬁque and Misic [14] reports
that TDD improves external quality when compared
to a waterfall approach. However, this improvement is
not strong. Further, TDD becomes disadvantageous for
the subset containing only academic studies in which
it is compared to an iterative, test-last (ITL) process
instead of a waterfall approach. This result suggests
that sequencing might have a negative effect on exter-
nal quality, which we haven’t observed. Productivity
results are more inconclusive in that the authors report
a small productivity hit for TDD when comparing TDD
with waterfall (attributed to differences in testing effort,
with a larger hit for the industrial subgroup), but the
effect, even though still small, is reserved when ITL is
compared with TDD. This latter observation suggests
sequencing might have a positive inﬂuence on produc-
tivity, which we have not been able to conﬁrm, either.
Raﬁque and Misic recommend further investigation with
longer-term studies with larger tasks to allow the effects
to become more visible. They also emphasize the impor-
tance of process conformance in TDD, which we capture
using the four dimensions.
According to a subsequent systematic literature review
by Munir et al. [44], TDD is beneﬁcial for external
quality when only high-quality studies are considered.
However, this improvement disappears over the whole
dataset, which includes studies of different levels of

--- PDF page 17 ---
17
TABLE 13: Summary of secondary studies about TDD
Reference Primary
Studies
Result
External Quality
Result
Productivity
Notes
[43] 32 Some improvement Inconclusive Following TDD
not enforced
[44] 41 Improvement in
high-rigor,high-
relevance
Inconclusive Inconclusive when
studies are considered
together
[14] 27 Small improvements,
more accentuated in in-
dustry
Inconclusive,
with a drop in industry
Task size
is a signiﬁcant modera-
tor
rigour. Again, the productivity results are inconclusive.
The authors recommend future studies to focus on in-
dustrial settings and professionals, and our study is in
that category.
Causevic et al.’s review [10] identiﬁed what they refer
to as insufﬁcient adherence to protocol , or process confor-
mance (i.e., the extent to which the steps of TDD are
followed), as one of the factors leading to the abandon-
ment of the practice. The authors’ review of industrial
case studies showed that, although developers deviate
from the process in several situations, conformance to
the TDD process is regarded as important. The authors
suggest that industrial investigations of TDD consider
the underlying process, which is what we endeavored
to do in our study.
Therefore, in general, there is a consensus that the no-
tion of process deserves a closer look. We agree with this
view. However, often TDD researchers equate process
with the test-ﬁrst dynamic of TDD. We think that the
idea of process conformance [44] or adherence to protocol
[45] is not only limited to the sequencing dimension.
Indeed, by looking closer at the other dimensions, we
discover that granularity and uniformity of the devel-
opment cycles trumps sequencing, at least in terms of
external quality, and developer productivity. In fact, in
our previous studies, we investigated the relationship
between sequencing and external quality and sequenc-
ing and productivity [19], [46] for TDD-like processes,
including ITL. We did not ﬁnd any evidence of such a
relationship.
M ¨uller and H ¨ofer [12] investigated the ways experts
and novices differ in applying TDD, focusing on pro-
cess conformance. To our knowledge, they are the only
researchers who explicitly considered characteristics of
TDD cycles other than sequencing. They used an auto-
matic inference tool similar to Besouro [22], which was
used in our study. Similar to our approach, M ¨uller and
H¨ofer use this tool to log developer actions and roll them
into cycles with different levels of compliance to a set of
TDD rules. Remarkably, they found that average cycle
length, close to our deﬁnition of granularity, and the
cycle length’s variation, close to our deﬁnition of unifor-
mity, were the most important differentiators between
experts and novices. In our study, we found a large and
highly signiﬁcant correlation between granularity and
uniformity, suggesting that these two dimensions might
capture the same information.
Pancur et al. [13] carried out two controlled experi-
ments comparing TDD to ITL, while making sure that
the process granularity of two treatments were com-
parable. Their rationale was to eliminate the possible
effect of the granularity, thereby isolating the effect of
sequencing. Again, they could not produce any evidence
that sequencing affects productivity or external quality.
Pancur et al. thus speculate that studies showing the
superiority of TDD over a test-last approach are in reality
due to the fact that most of the experiments employ
a coarse-grained test-last process—closer to the Waterfall
approach—as control group. This creates a large dif-
ferential in granularity between the treatments. In the
end, it is possible that TDD performs better only when
compared to a coarse-grained development process [13].
8 D ISCUSSION
In this section, we answer the research questions and
brieﬂy discuss the implications. To answer the research
questions, we rely on the results of the multiple regres-
sion analysis, focusing on the models presented in Tables
9 and 10 after feature selection.
We remark ﬁrst that the ﬁnal models are highly signif-
icant, and have a medium-sized adjusted R2. However,
the limitations presented in Section 6 should not be
ignored in operationalizing the results.
RQ-QLTY—Which subset of the four factors best ex-
plain external quality? Improvements in external qual-
ity were associated with granular (short) development
cycles with minimal variation. Refactoring, counter-
intuitively, had a negative association with external qual-
ity. Most notably, sequencing—the dimension which is
most commonly identiﬁed with TDD—was absent in the
model. There were no signiﬁcant interactions between
granularity and uniformity. We conclude that granular-
ity, uniformity and refactoring effort together constitute
the best explanatory factors for external quality.
RQ-PROD—Which subset of the four factors best
explain developer productivity? The results for produc-
tivity were similar to those of quality. Improvements
in productivity were also associated with the factors
related to both cyclical characteristics of the process—
granular cycles with minimal variation—and refactor-
ing effort. Sequencing and interactions were absent. We
conclude that granularity, uniformity and refactoring
effort together constitute the best explanatory factors for
developer productivity.

--- PDF page 18 ---
18
Given the study limitations and the answers to the
research questions, we operationalize the results in terms
of the following take-aways.
Granularity and uniformity are possibly the most
important factors in TDD-like processes. According
to our results, emphasizing the iterative nature of the
process provides the “best bang for the buck”. We thus
recommend focusing on breaking down development
tasks into as small and as uniform steps as possible.
We think that this aspect should be emphasised over
religiously focusing on leading each production cycle
with unit tests. Our results conﬁrm the common advice
of limiting the length of production (test-code or code-
test) and refactoring cycles to ﬁve to ten minutes and
keeping a steady rhythm.
Short cycles and a steady rhythm go hand in hand,
meaning these two characteristics together make a differ-
ence. In isolation, they may not be as effective since some
of the individual coefﬁcients in the regression models
were insigniﬁcant. Further studies should focus on the
isolated effects of granularity and uniformity, speciﬁcally
on developer productivity.
The order in which unit tests are written vis-´ a-vis
production code does not appear to be important for
TDD-like processes. This ﬁnding goes against the com-
mon folklore about TDD that stresses leading production
cycles with unit tests, above other aspects. Sequencing
does not appear among the factors selected for either
external quality or productivity in the ﬁnal models.
The absence of sequencing as an inﬂuential dimension
does not imply that a strictly develop-then-test (test-last)
strategy should be preferred over a test-ﬁrst strategy: this
advice would require a negative (statistically signiﬁcant)
coefﬁcient, which the models did not produce. Our result
simply states that the order in which unit tests and
production code are written may not be as important
as commonly thought so long as the process is iterative,
granular, and uniform. Therefore, the developers could
follow the approach they prefer while paying particular
attention to step size and keeping a steady rhythm.
We further qualify this latter advice with the limita-
tions of the study in mind. A test-ﬁrst dynamic may
provide long-term advantages not addressed by or de-
tected in our study. For example we have not tackled the
potential beneﬁts of test-ﬁrst in resolving requirements
uncertainty, formalizing design decisions, and encourag-
ing writing more tests [6], all of which may kick in the
longer term and tip the balance in favor of an emphasis
for test-ﬁrst.
We are not able to draw general or sweeping con-
clusions regarding refactoring effort due to the validity
threat associated with the representation of this construct
and the short-term nature of the study. In our study,
refactoring effort was negatively associated with both
external quality (an unexpected ﬁnding) and developer
productivity (an expected ﬁnding). However these ﬁnd-
ings were subject to limitations. We believe that longer-
term studies with better constructs are required to reveal
the quality and productivity effects of refactoring activity
in the context of TDD-like processes. Such effects should
be visible once the risk of breaking the system becomes
a signiﬁcant risk and the test assets start paying off in
terms of the coverage required to support adding new
functionality. Moreover the effects, harmful or beneﬁcial,
possibly depend on the nature and distribution of the
refactoring activity—e.g., whether pure or ﬂoss–and thus
the construct must be represented by measures that are
able to differentiate between the different types.
In summary, dissecting the TDD process into its more
elementary aspects shed light on certain established TDD
myths. Our results suggest that the secret of TDD, in
particular with respect to quality, might not be centered
on its test-ﬁrst nature, but rather on its ability to encour-
age developers to consistently take ﬁne-grained steps,
what Kent Beck calls baby steps [2], provided that they
keep writing tests. Thus TDD, and its variants, can be
thought of as a process that facilitates a highly ﬁne-
grained approach to software development, which in
turn promises to improve quality and productivity. Such
improvements may be small or uncertain in the short
term. Further studies are needed to investigate more
persistent, long-term effects and the role of refactoring.
An important corollary of our ﬁndings is that in-
cremental test-last (ITL) and TDD are not necessarily
that different deep down: they could be substitutes and
equally effective provided that they are performed at the
same level of granularity and uniformity. Raﬁque and
Misic [14], Causevic et al. [10], [12], and Pancur et al. [13]
previously speculated on the importance of granularity,
as discussed in Section 7. Our ﬁndings support their
intuition.
We encourage other researchers to attempt to replicate
this study, preferably in varying contexts and with dif-
ferent subject proﬁles. A lab package [25] is available for
replication purposes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported in part by the Academy of
Finland Project #278354 and the TEKES FiDiPro Pro-
gramme. We would like to acknowledge Dr. Lucas Lay-
man, who designed one of the tasks used in the study.
We are indebted to the reviewers whose diligence, thor-
oughness and attention to detail were extremely helpful.
They identiﬁed many mistakes and led us to uncover
inconsistencies in the data. In particular, through their
suggestions and insights, we were able to revise and
improve our measures and analyses considerably.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Jeffries and G. Melnik, “TDD–The art of fearless program-
ming,” Software, IEEE, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 24–30, 2007.
[2] K. Beck, Test-driven development: by example , ser. The Addison-
Wesley signature series. Addison-Wesley, 2003.
[3] R. C. Martin, Agile software development: principles, patterns, and
practices. Prentice Hall PTR, 2003.
[4] R. Jeffries, A. Anderson, and C. Hendrickson, Extreme program-
ming installed. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2001.

--- PDF page 19 ---
19
[5] K. Schwaber, “Scrum development process,” in Business Object
Design and Implementation . Springer, 1997, pp. 117–134.
[6] H. Erdogmus, M. Grigory, and J. Ron, “Test-driven development,”
in Encyclopedia of Software Engineering, P . Laplante, Ed. New York:
Taylor and Francis, 2009, pp. 1211–1229.
[7] M. Fowler, Refactoring: improving the design of existing code . Pear-
son Education, 2009.
[8] P . Weißgerber and S. Diehl, “Are refactorings less error-prone than
other changes?” in Proceedings of the 2006 international workshop on
Mining software repositories . ACM, 2006, pp. 112–118.
[9] G. Bavota, B. De Carluccio, A. De Lucia, M. Di Penta, R. Oliveto,
and O. Strollo, “When does a refactoring induce bugs? an em-
pirical study,” in Source Code Analysis and Manipulation (SCAM),
2012 IEEE 12th International Working Conference on . IEEE, 2012,
pp. 104–113.
[10] A. Causevic, D. Sundmark, and S. Punnekkat, “Factors limiting
industrial adoption of test-driven development: A systematic
review,” in Software Testing, Veriﬁcation and Validation (ICST), 2011
IEEE Fourth International Conference on . IEEE, 2011, pp. 337–346.
[11] H. Erdogmus, M. Morisio, and M. Torchiano, “On the effective-
ness of the test-ﬁrst approach to programming,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering , vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 226–237, 2005.
[12] M. M. M ¨uller and A. H ¨ofer, “The effect of experience on the
test-driven development process,” Empirical Software Engineering ,
vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 593–615, 2007.
[13] M. Pan ˇcur and M. Ciglari ˇc, “Impact of test-driven development
on productivity, code and tests: A controlled experiment,” Infor-
mation and Software Technology , vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 557–573, 2011.
[14] Y. Raﬁque and V . B. Miˇsi´c, “The effects of test-driven development
on external quality and productivity: A meta-analysis,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 835–856,
2013.
[15] Y. Wang and H. Erdogmus, “The role of process measurement in
test-driven development,” in 4th Conference on Extreme Program-
ming and Agile Methods , 2004.
[16] C. Mann, “Observational research methods. Research design
II: cohort, cross-sectional, and case-control studies,” Emergency
Medicine Journal, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 54–60, 2003.
[17] A. T. Misirli, H. Erdogmus, N. Juristo, and O. Dieste, “Topic se-
lection in industry experiments,” in the 2nd International Workshop.
New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, 2014, pp. 25–30.
[18] D. Fucci and B. Turhan, “On the role of tests in test-driven
development: a differentiated and partial replication,” Empirical
Software Engineering, vol. 19, pp. 1–26, 2013.
[19] D. Fucci, B. Turhan, and M. Oivo, “Impact of process conformance
on the effects of test-driven development,” in Proceedings of the 8th
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineer-
ing and Measurement . ACM, 2014, p. 10.
[20] L. Madeyski, “The impact of pair programming and test-
driven development on package dependencies in object-oriented
design—an experiment,” Product-Focused Software Process Improve-
ment, pp. 278–289, 2006.
[21] A. Hernndez-Lpez, R. Colomo-Palacios, and A. Garca-Crespo,
“Productivity in software engineering: a study of its meanings for
practitioners: understanding the concept under their standpoint,”
in Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI), 2012 7th Iberian
Conference on, June 2012, pp. 1–6.
[22] K. Becker, B. Pedroso, and M. S. Pimenta, “Besouro: a framework
for exploring compliance rules in automatic TDD behavior assess-
ment,” Information and Software Systems Journal , 2014.
[23] H. Kou, P . M. Johnson, and H. Erdogmus, “Operational deﬁnition
and automated inference of test-driven development with Zorro,”
Automated Software Engineering , 2010.
[24] B. George and L. Williams, “An initial investigation of test driven
development in industry,” in Proceedings of the 2003 ACM sympo-
sium on Applied computing . New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2003, pp.
1135–1139.
[25] D. Fucci, “A dissection of test-driven development process:
Does it really matter to test-ﬁrst or to test-last? - lab
package,” 6 2016. [Online]. Available: https://dx.doi.org/10.
6084/m9.ﬁgshare.3458996.v5
[26] D. Fucci and B. Turhan, “A replicated experiment on the effective-
ness of test-ﬁrst development,” in 2013 ACM/IEEE International
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement
(ESEM). IEEE, 2013, pp. 103–112.
[27] M. Aniche and M. Gerosa, “Most common mistakes in test-driven
development practice: results from an online survey with devel-
opers,” in Software Testing, Veriﬁcation, and Validation Workshops
(ICSTW), 2010 Third International Conference on , April 2010, pp.
469–478.
[28] E. McCrum-Gardner, “Which is the correct statistical test to use?”
British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery , vol. 46, no. 1, pp.
38–41, Jan. 2008.
[29] P . D. Ellis, The essential guide to effect sizes: Statistical power, meta-
analysis, and the interpretation of research results . Cambridge
University Press, 2010.
[30] K. P . Burnham and D. R. Anderson, “Multimodel inference un-
derstanding AIC and BIC in model selection,” Sociological methods
& research, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 261–304, 2004.
[31] J. Cohen, “A power primer.” Psychological bulletin, vol. 112, no. 1,
p. 155, 1992.
[32] V . B. Kampenes, T. Dyb ˚a, J. E. Hannay, and D. I. Sjøberg, “A
systematic review of effect size in software engineering experi-
ments,” Information and Software Technology , vol. 49, no. 11, pp.
1073–1086, 2007.
[33] D. E. Farrar and R. R. Glauber, “Multicollinearity in regression
analysis: the problem revisited,” The Review of Economic and
Statistics, vol. 49, pp. 92–107, 1967.
[34] J. Jobson, Applied Multivariate Data Analysis: Regression and Exper-
imental Design (Springer Texts in Statistics) . Springer, 1999.
[35] H. Akaike, “A new look at the statistical model identiﬁcation,”
Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 716–723,
Dec 1974.
[36] K. P . Burnham and D. R. Anderson, Model Selection and Multimodel
Inference: A Practical Information-Theoretic Approach . Springer,
2003.
[37] Y. Yang, “Can the strengths of AIC and BIC be shared? A con-
ﬂict between model indentiﬁcation and regression estimation,”
Biometrika, vol. 92, no. 4, pp. 937–950, 2005.
[38] E. Murphy-Hill, C. Parnin, and A. P . Black, “How we refactor,
and how we know it,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,
vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 5–18, 2012.
[39] E. A. Pena and E. H. Slate, “Global validation of linear model
assumptions,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , vol.
101, no. 473, pp. 341–354, 2006.
[40] W. Cleveland and S. Devlin, “Locally weighted regression: an
approach to regression analysis by local ﬁtting,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, vol. 83, no. 403, pp. 596–610, 1988.
[41] Y. Xia, “Model checking in regression via dimension reduction,”
Biometrika, vol. 96, no. 1, pp. 133–148, 2009.
[42] C. Wohlin, Experimentation in software engineering: an introduction .
Springer, 2000, vol. 6.
[43] B. Turhan, L. Layman, M. Diep, H. Erdogmus, and F. Shull,
“How effective is test-driven development?” in Making Software.
O’Reilly Media, 2010.
[44] H. Munir, M. Moayyed, and K. Petersen, “Considering rigor and
relevance when evaluating test driven development: A systematic
review,” Information and Software Technology , vol. 56, no. 4, pp.
375–394, Apr. 2014.
[45] A. Causevic, D. Sundmark, and S. Punnekkat, “Test case quality in
test driven development: a study design and a pilot experiment,”
in Evaluation Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE 2012), 16th
International Conference on , 2012, pp. 223–227.
[46] D. Fucci, B. Turhan, and M. Oivo, “Conformance factor
in test-driven development: Initial results from an enhanced
replication,” in Proceedings of the 18th International Conference
on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering , ser. EASE
’14. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 22:1–22:4. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2601248.2601272