
--- PDF page 1 ---
Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven
Development
Adrian Santos · Sira Vegas · Oscar
Dieste · Fernando Uyaguari · Ay¸ se
Tosun · Davide Fucci · Burak Turhan ·
Giuseppe Scanniello · Simone Romano ·
Itir Karac · Marco Kuhrmann ·
Vladimir Mandi´ c· Robert Ramaˇ c·
Dietmar Pfahl · Christian Engblom ·
Jarno Kyykka · Kerli Rungi · Carolina
Palomeque · Jaroslav Spisak · Markku
Oivo · Natalia Juristo
the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later
A. Santos, I. Karac and M. Oivo
University of Oulu, Finland
E-mail: {adrian.santos.parrilla,itir.karac,markku.oivo}@oulu.ﬁ
S. Vegas, O. Dieste and N. Juristo
Universidad Polit´ ecnica de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
E-mail: {svegas,odieste,natalia}@ﬁ.upm.es
F. Uyaguari and C. Palomeque
ETAPA, Ecuador E-mail: {fuyaguar,cpalomeq}@etapa.net.ec
A. Tosun
Istanbul Technical University, Turkey (University of Oulu when the experiments were run)
E-mail: tosunay@itu.edu.tr
B. Turhan
University of Oulu, Finland and Monash University, Australia
E-mail: burak.turhan@oulu.ﬁ
D. Fucci
Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden (University of Oulu when the experiments were
run)
E-mail: davide.fucci@bth.se
G. Scanniello
University of Basilicata, Italy
E-mail: giuseppe.scanniello@unibas.it
S. Romano
University of Bari, Italy (University of Basilicata when the experiments were run)
E-mail: simone.romano@uniba.it
M. Kuhrmann
University of Passau, Germany (University of Southern Denmark when the experiments
were run)
E-mail: kuhrmann@ﬁm.uni-passau.de
arXiv:2011.11942v1  [cs.SE]  24 Nov 2020

--- PDF page 2 ---
2 Adrian Santos et al.
Abstract Context: Test-driven development (TDD) is an agile software de-
velopment approach that has been widely claimed to improve software quality.
However, the extent to which TDD improves quality appears to be largely de-
pendent upon the characteristics of the study in which it is evaluated (e.g.,
the research method, participant type, programming environment, etc.). The
particularities of each study make the aggregation of results untenable. Objec-
tives: The goal of this paper is to: increase the accuracy and generalizability
of the results achieved in isolated experiments on TDD, provide joint con-
clusions on the performance of TDD across diﬀerent industrial and academic
settings, and assess the extent to which the characteristics of the experiments
aﬀect the quality-related performance of TDD. Method: We conduct a family
of 12 experiments on TDD in academia and industry. We aggregate their re-
sults by means of meta-analysis. We perform exploratory analyses to identify
variables impacting the quality-related performance of TDD. Results: TDD
novices achieve a slightly higher code quality with iterative test-last devel-
opment (i.e., ITL, the reverse approach of TDD) than with TDD. The task
being developed largely determines quality. The programming environment,
the order in which TDD and ITL are applied, or the learning eﬀects from
one development approach to another do not appear to aﬀect quality. The
quality-related performance of professionals using TDD drops more than for
students. We hypothesize that this may be due to their being more resistant
to change and potentially less motivated than students. Conclusion: Previous
studies seem to provide conﬂicting results on TDD performance (i.e., positive
vs. negative, respectively). We hypothesize that these conﬂicting results may
be due to diﬀerent study durations, experiment participants being unfamiliar
with the TDD process, or case studies comparing the performance achieved
by TDD vs. the control approach (e.g., the waterfall model), each applied to
develop a diﬀerent system. Further experiments with TDD experts are needed
to validate these hypotheses.
Keywords Family of Experiments · Test-Driven Development · Industry ·
Academia · Quality
V. Mandi´ c and R. Ramaˇ c
University of Novi Sad, Serbia
E-mail: {vladman,ramac.robert}@uns.ac.rs
D. Pfahl
University of Tartu, Estonia
E-mail: dietmar.pfahl@ut.ee
C. Engblom and J. Kyykka
Ericsson, Finland. C. Engblom is retired now
K. Rungi
Testlio, Estonia (PlayTech when the experiments were run)
J. Spisak
Paf, Finland

--- PDF page 3 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 3
1 Introduction
Test-driven development TDD is an agile software development approach stip-
ulating the construction of software systems by means of micro iterative testing-
coding cycles—as opposed to test-last approaches, where coding and testing
are rarely interleaved, and coding is usually performed before testing. Accord-
ing to TDD proponents [2,6], these micro-iterative testing-coding cycles are
the main reason why TDD outperforms test-last development approaches in
terms of software quality. Although the TDD literature [9,12,31,35,37,42,49]
examines several quality attributes, we focus here on external quality. Exter-
nal quality is one of the most researched attributes, which, according to its
proponents [2,6], TDD beneﬁts the most. It is usually considered in the TDD
literature as the number of successful test cases in a test battery (i.e., test
oracle [8]) speciﬁcally built for testing the application under development [12,
31,42,49] 1. In this article, we deﬁne quality as the percentage of test battery
tests developed by the experimenters that pass.
The rationale of TDD proponents is seemingly intuitive: if tests are built
up-front in small iterations—rather than after the code has been developed,
that is, “. . . Don’t write a line of new code unless you ﬁrst have a failing
automated test. . . ” [6]—the developers put a limit on the code [2], think up-
front about its design [6], and reduce their stress in response to potential
errors [6]. These continuous and incremental iterations lead to a virtuous cycle
[6] that eventually translates into “. . . simpler designs. . . , systems that reveal
intent. . . , [and] extremely low-defect systems that start out robust, are robust
at the end, and stay robust all the time. . . ” [2].
Although this may sound too good to be true, there is no scarcity of empiri-
cal studies supporting these claims [9,12,31,35,37,42,49]. However, the extent
to which TDD improves quality is still inconclusive, especially in view of the
large heterogeneity of results reported in the literature, and the many dimen-
sions on which the studies diﬀer. As many contextual factors vary across the
published studies, we wonder what impact they may be having on the reported
results.
Families of experiments—a term coined by Basili et al. in 1999 [5] for refer-
ring to groups of interrelated experiments pursuing the same goal—are on the
rise in software engineering (SE) [45]. However, there is no consensus on how
diﬀerent interrelated experiments can be. Gomez et al. [21] state that they can
lie: from identical replications (i.e., experiments following exactly the same
procedures and operationalizations as baseline experiments), to conceptual
replications (i.e., experiments that only share research questions with baseline
experiments). Some other authors argue that they should only be conceptual
replications (e.g., Kitchenham [30]). In our experience after performing a Sys-
tematic Mapping Study (SMS) to identify the families of experiments already
published in SE [45], we have seen that experiments typically share experi-
1 For simplicity’s sake, we refer to quality and external quality interchangeably throughout
the rest of the article. We acknowledge the limitations of this under the threats to validity.

--- PDF page 4 ---
4 Adrian Santos et al.
mental design, response variable operationalizations, and research questions
and objectives. Nevertheless, some slight changes are usually made across the
replications (e.g., in terms of experimental session length or participant type
evaluated).
Albeit not without shortcomings (e.g., families tend to be composed of
fewer studies than are usually gathered in systematic literature reviews (SLRs),
families usually study fewer response variables than SLRs, etc. [45]) and have
some strengths that make them good for assessing the performance of SE
interventions (such as TDD) [45]:
– As families do not rely on already published studies, families avoid the
potential eﬀects of publication bias (i.e., the tendency to publish more
favorable than unfavorable results [13]) on joint outcomes.
– As there is access to raw data within families (since the researchers run
the experiments themselves), it is possible to apply consistent procedures
for analyzing each experiment individually. This ensures that diﬀerences
across experiment results are not due to the use of diﬀerent procedures
to analyze each experiment, but, instead, due to real diﬀerences in the
collected data [13].
– As the response variables can be measured identically in all the experi-
ments, families avoid the potentially detrimental eﬀects of combining the
results of studies with diﬀerent response variable operationalizations into
joint conclusions.
– As the researchers conducting families are able to design the experiments
as desired, they can systematically vary the conditions of the experiments
(e.g., their programming languages, experimental designs, etc.) with the
aim of assessing the inﬂuence of such changes on results [27], or ﬁxing
identiﬁed ﬂaws in the design.
To the best of our knowledge, the Experimental Software Engineering In-
dustry Laboratory (ESEIL Project) is the ﬁrst research project undertaking a
family of experiments on TDD across several software industrial partners and
universities. With our family, we aim to answer three research questions:
– RQ1: Do TDD and iterative test-last development (ITL) perform similarly
in terms of quality?
– RQ2: To what extent is quality aﬀected by the task under development?
– RQ3: To what extent is quality aﬀected by the experiment characteristics:
participant type (i.e., professionals vs. students), programming environ-
ment2 (i.e., Java and related IDEs and testing tools vs. C++/C# and
related IDEs and testing tools), learning eﬀects from one session to an-
other, or order of application of ITL and TDD?
2 Note that in our experiments the programming language is confounded with other vari-
ables: IDE, testing tools, and other programming environment related variables (the use
of Java implies the use of Java-related technologies, while the use of C++/C# implies the
use of C++/C#-related technologies). We have grouped all confounded variables under the
programming environment name.

--- PDF page 5 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 5
– RQ4: To what extent is quality aﬀected by the participant characteristics:
programming, programming language, unit testing, or testing tool experi-
ence?
To answer these research questions, we conducted 12 controlled experi-
ments in both industry and academia. In all the experiments, we measured
quality identically and had the participants code identical tasks. We followed
a mixed approach for designing the experiments: while we adapted the pro-
gramming environments and experimental designs to the requirements of our
industrial partners, we explored the potential limitations of these experiments
by comparing their results with the outcomes of the academic experiments that
we ran. We followed a two-step data analysis approach: we ﬁrst conducted a
meta-analysis to output joint results [10] (answering RQ1), and then we per-
formed a series of exploratory analyses (i.e., sub-group meta-analyses [10] and
linear mixed models [11]) to assess the inﬂuence of third variables on results
(answering RQ2 and RQ3). Along the way, we made several ﬁndings:
– TDD novices (both professionals and students) perform slightly better with
ITL than with TDD in terms of quality—although the diﬀerence in per-
formance is not statistically signiﬁcant. Our results suggest that not much
improvement would be achieved with the application of TDD over ITL by
TDD novices.
– TDD performance appears to drop more for professionals than for students
(compared to performance using ITL). This suggests either that students
learn completely new development approaches (such as TDD) faster than
professionals or that the drop in quality for professionals applying TDD is
greater than for students because professionals achieve higher quality than
students when using ITL.
– Programming environment (i.e., Java environment, or C++/C# environ-
ment), the order in which TDD is applied (i.e., in the ﬁrst or second ses-
sion), the learning eﬀects from one session to the next, or the task being
developed—as long as the same task is developed with both TDD and
ITL—do not appear to have an impact on the diﬀerence in performance
between TDD and ITL.
The main contributions of this paper are an assessment of the quality-
related performance of TDD in a family of experiments and a series of ex-
ploratory analyses to evaluate the extent to which the experiment and par-
ticipant characteristics aﬀect TDD performance in industrial and academic
settings. We think this article rounds out previous research in several ways:
1. This is the ﬁrst family of experiments on TDD. Besides, this is one of the
largest families in SE research with respect to number of experiments (12),
universities (8), companies (4), and participants (411) [46]. This research
should increase the reliability of the ﬁndings, and the generalization of
results to diﬀerent contexts and populations [5].
2. This family of experiments is one of the few studies on TDD—apart from
[42]—that attempt to provide joint conclusions by means of meta-analysis.

--- PDF page 6 ---
6 Adrian Santos et al.
This should increase the reliability of the joint conclusions with respect
to ﬁndings reached using a narrative approach of counting positive vs.
negative results [10,22]. The narrative approach is typically adopted in
secondary and tertiary studies on TDD—perhaps because it is not feasible
to apply meta-analysis on the studies published in the literature.
3. This family of experiments includes the results of four industrial experi-
ments on TDD. The need for more industrial experiments on TDD was
already highlighted by Munir et al. [37] and Raﬁque and Miˇ si´ c [42].
4. This family of experiments compiles the primary studies identiﬁed in pre-
vious secondary studies, remaps and organizes them with regard to their
characteristics and results, and provides further lines of research in view of
both the results of our family of experiments, and the resulting map. This
adds to the work of others, calling upon the community to conduct more
research on TDD [40].
5. This study is the ﬁrst on TDD that aims to study the inﬂuence of partic-
ipant characteristics on results across multiple experimental settings and
populations. We can do this as we have access to the raw data of all the ex-
periments and also because we used similar instruments to measure the par-
ticipant characteristics and external quality across the experiments. This
may be unfeasible in SLRs: either because the raw data are not available, or
because diﬀerent measurement instruments are used across the published
experiments to measure participant experience.
6. This family of experiments is one of the few SE families that provide the
raw data and R code to make results reproducible [46]. Also, it is one of the
few families planning to make experimental data available (i.e., the code of
participants). This should facilitate re-analysis, the application of diﬀerent
analysis methods to provide joint conclusions, the investigation of other
research questions, and the integration of results in future meta-analyses.
7. The results of this family of experiments contradict ﬁndings commonly
reached in secondary and tertiary studies on the eﬀectiveness of TDD on
external quality [29]. While secondary and tertiary studies typically indi-
cate that TDD achieves higher quality than control approaches [29], we do
not reach the same conclusion. Also, our results disagree with the ﬁndings
of the meta-analyses conducted by [42] claiming that industrial experiments
led to more signiﬁcant improvements in quality with TDD. In particular,
we reached the opposite conclusion in the industrial experiments that we
ran (i.e., the performance of professionals with TDD dropped to a larger
extent than for students). The diﬀerence in results could be due to the
control used. In our family of experiments, we use ITL (instead of the wa-
terfall model) as a control. The only diﬀerence between ITL and TDD is
when tests are generated (either before or after coding), but both use short
development cycles. The waterfall model implies that tests are generated
after coding and there are no development cycles. The beneﬁts of TDD
could be due to the use of these short development cycles (which is also a
characteristic of ITL [29], but not of the waterfall model). In view of this,
we call upon the community not only to look at the results of the studies

--- PDF page 7 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 7
but to also assess the extent to which participant or study characteristics
may be inﬂuencing results.
8. This family of experiments partially supports the results of [20], one of
the latest publications on TDD in testing software engineering, namely,
that the order of testing (either ﬁrst, as in TDD, or last, as in ITL) does
not appear to inﬂuence external quality. Indeed, although ITL achieved
slightly higher quality than TDD in our family of experiments, the diﬀer-
ence was not relevant. What really appears to be improving quality is not
when testing is performed—ﬁrst or last—but rather the average duration
of development cycles, the duration uniformity and the refactoring eﬀort.
9. This family of experiments partially supports Beck’s suggestions [6] that
virtuous cycles —leading to higher performance—materialize with TDD.
However, such virtuous cycles may only materialize with students that
have quite a lot more programming experience than their peers. This is a
ground for further research to double-check our observations.
Paper organization. Section 2 discusses the work related to our study.
In Section 3, we describe the characteristics of our family of experiments on
TDD. Then, Section 4, Section 5, Section 6 and Section 7 answer RQ1, RQ2,
RQ3, and RQ4, respectively, and discuss the implications of our ﬁndings. In
Section 8, we outline the threats to validity of our study. Finally, we outline
our conclusions in Section 9.
2 Related Work
Here we provide an overview of the research that has been conducted so far
on the quality-related performance of TDD based on the results of the sec-
ondary studies addressing this question [9,12,31,35,37,42,49]. In particular,
we ﬁrst went through the secondary studies and gathered all the primary stud-
ies that—according to the authors of the secondary studies—studied external
quality. Then, we removed duplicates by title and by double publication (i.e.,
any primary studies that had already been published in other venues), selecting
the most recent publications. Finally, we extracted the following information
from each primary study for the purposes of classiﬁcation:
– The results achieved : the response ratio eﬀect size [10]. First we calculated
the response ratio by dividing the mean of the quality scores achieved with
TDD by the mean of the quality scores achieved with the control approach
(e.g., ITL or waterfall model). For example, if 30 bugs have been reported
in a system developed with ITL and 10 in a system developed with TDD,
the response ratio is equal to 3. We multiply the response ratio by 100%
to convey the percentage improvement of TDD over ITL. In the above
example, TDD outperformed ITL by 300%.
– The research method according to Wohlin et. al.’s deﬁnitions [58]:
– Surveys: empirical studies that collect information from or about people
to describe, compare or explain their knowledge, attitudes and behavior

--- PDF page 8 ---
8 Adrian Santos et al.
T able 1 Primary studies assessing the quality-related performance of TDD.
ID Result (%) Method Control Participant T ask Unit Length Environment
[P31] -39 Case study Waterfall BSc Industrial Team Months Google Web Kit, Adobe Flex, SVN
[P36] -33 Experiment Waterfall MSc Toy Solo Weeks Java,Eclipse, CVS
[P22] -30 Experiment Waterfall MSc Toy Solo Days Java, JUnit, Unix
[P32] -5 Case study Waterfall BSc Toy Solo Weeks Java, JUnit, Eclipse
[P14] -4 Case study Waterfall BSc Industrial Team Months Java, PHP, Eclipse, JUnit, CVS
[P9] -3 Case study ITL BSc Toy Solo Days Java, JUnit, Eclipse, CVS
[P25] -3 Case study ITL BSc Toy Pairs Weeks Java, JUnit, Eclipse
[P12] 0 Case study Waterfall Prof Toy Team Days JUnit, VBExpect; SQL
[P17] 2 Case study Waterfall Prof Industrial Team ? ?
[P24] 2.5 Experiment ITL BSc Toy Solo Days Java, JUnit, Eclipse
[P5] 3 Case study Waterfall BSc Toy Solo Months Java, JUnit
[P33] 11 Experiment Waterfall BSc Toy Solo Days Java; JUnit, Eclipse
[P13] 12 Experiment Waterfall BSc, MSc Toy Solo Weeks Java, JUnit, DrJava editor
[P7] 12 Experiment Waterfall BSc, MSc, Prof Toy Solo Days Pseudocode
[P10] 18 Experiment Waterfall Prof Toy Pairs Days Java, JUnit
[P8] 22 Case study Waterfall BSc Toy Solo Weeks Java, JUnit
[P27] 24 Case study Waterfall BSc Toy Solo ? ?
[P34] 36 Case study Waterfall BSc Toy Solo Months Java
[P30] 36 Case study Waterfall Prof Industrial Team Years Java
[P28] 40 Case study Waterfall Prof Industrial Team Years Java, ANT
[P20] 50 Case study Waterfall Prof Industrial Team Years Java, JUnit, Ant
[P4] 55 Case study Waterfall Prof Industrial Team Years C++, XML
[P11] 62 Experiment Waterfall BSc Toy Pairs Days Java, JUnit
[P6] 80 Case study Waterfall Prof Industrial Team Months JUnit, Java, Netbeans, CVS
[P23] 90 Case study Waterfall Prof Industrial Team Years Java, JUnit, C, C++, C#
[P18] 96 Case study ITL Prof Toy Solo Days Java, AspectJ, JSP, XML, Eclipse
[P3] 100 Case study Waterfall Prof Industrial Team Years C/C++, CUnitTest
[P35] 267 Case study Waterfall Prof Toy Pairs, Solo Days ?
[P2] - Case study Waterfall Prof Industrial Team Years Java, Ant, CVS, SVN
[P15] - Case study - Prof Industrial Team Months C#, Java, Struts
[P29] - Case study ITL MSc, Prof Industrial Team Months Java
[P19] - Case study Waterfall Prof Industrial Pairs Years Java
[P1] - Survey Waterfall Prof - - Weeks -
[P16] - Case study Waterfall BSc Toy Team Weeks Java, JUnit, CVS
[P21] - Case study Waterfall Prof Industrial Solo ? Java, JUnit?
[P26] - Case study - MSc Toy Solo Days Java, JUnit, Swing

--- PDF page 9 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 9
For us, the deﬁning characteristic of surveys is that their results are
based upon the opinions of the respondents.
– Case studies: empirical studies that draw on multiple sources of evi-
dence to investigate one instance of a phenomenon within its real-life
context. For us, the deﬁning characteristic of case studies is that their
results are based upon those observed in uncontrolled but real-life en-
vironments.
– Experiments: empirical studies that investigate a certain phenomenon
in a controlled—albeit scaled down—environment. For us, the deﬁning
characteristic of experiments is that all the contextual factors of the
experiment (e.g., the programming environment, the tasks under de-
velopment, etc.) have an identical impact on all the interventions being
compared.
– The control: the whole system coded before testing (waterfall) or the re-
verse approach of TDD (ITL).
– Participant type: we used bachelor students (BSc), master students (MSc),
or professionals (Prof).
– Task type: the systems developed by the participants are either toy tasks
(i.e., small tasks with a reduced scope), or industrial tasks (i.e., large tasks
with real-life requirements).
– The unit of analysis: quality is evaluated for solo programmers (i.e., solo),
for pair programmers [56] (i.e., pairs) or for groups (i.e., teams).
– Length of the study : days, weeks, months, or years.
– Programming environment: the technologies that may potentially interact
with the performance of TDD (e.g., the programming language, the testing
tool used, etc.).
Table 1 shows the list of the primary studies 3 that we selected (ordered by
response ratio, with the worst results for TDD ﬁrst). Notice that:
– The results of the diﬀerent studies are hugely variable . For example, TDD
outperforms ITL in terms of quality measured by successful tests in a four-
hour experiment with undergraduate students coding toy tasks with Java,
JUnit and Eclipse [P24] by just 2.5%. On the other hand, TDD outperforms
the waterfall model in terms of quality measured by reported bugs in a case
study at Microsoft, where a small team of developers used C++ and C#
to implement a new functionality in an industrial system over several years
[P23], by up to 90%. The variation ranges from -39% to +267%.
– In most studies, TDD achieves higher quality than control approaches(mostly
the waterfall model) both quantitatively (20 out of 36) and textually 4 (the
eight studies marked with a ’-’). Detrimental eﬀects were reported by only
seven studies, of which four showed negligible eﬀects (from -5% to -3%).
3 Due to space restrictions, we moved the references of the primary studies to the supple-
mentary material (see Appendix A).
4 It was not feasible to compute any response ratio synthesizing the quality achieved with
TDD with respect to a control approach.

--- PDF page 10 ---
10 Adrian Santos et al.
– Most primary studies are case studies (27 out of 36). TDD was evaluated
in a controlled environment in only eight experiments.
– Case studies report the most optimistic results for TDD . When case studies
show detrimental eﬀects, they tend to be negligible (except for [P31] with
undergraduate participants).
– Professionals tend to participate only in case studies , which tend to eval-
uate TDD performance for teams rather than for solo programmers (i.e.,
the resulting quality of the whole system after it has been implemented by
a group of developers). In the only two controlled experiments in which
professionals participated and were evaluated as either solo or pair pro-
grammers (i.e., [P7,P10]), the results were not as favorable to TDD.
– The most beneﬁcial results for TDD tend to be achieved for teams . On the
contrary, the performance of TDD for solo programmers shows conﬂicting
evidence (ranging from -33% to +96%). In general, the studies evaluating
solo or pair programmers show less optimistic results than those evaluating
teams (except for the outlier in [P35] 5).
– TDD has been evaluated with both toy tasks and industrial tasks (i.e., 16
and 20, respectively): Professionals are usually involved in studies evaluat-
ing the performance of TDD in industrial tasks, whereas students partici-
pate in studies with toy tasks. The studies with toy tasks tend to provide
less optimistic results for TDD.
– The studies with longer periods of evaluation tend to report the most fa-
vorable results for TDD . This suggests that it may be necessary to apply
TDD for months or years, rather than days or weeks, to get larger beneﬁts
from this approach.
– TDD has been mostly evaluated with Java technologies . However, some iso-
lated studies have also evaluated TDD with C technologies (e.g., C/C++/C#
and related IDEs and testing tools). In such studies, the results are always
favorable to TDD.
Summarizing, most studies indicate that TDD is superior to control ap-
proaches (i.e., mostly the waterfall model) with respect to quality. However,
the extent to which TDD achieves higher quality than control approaches ap-
pears to be largely dependent upon the characteristics of the study in which
TDD is evaluated. The heterogeneity of research methods, programming envi-
ronments, lengths of evaluation, units of analysis, task types, and participant
types makes the aggregation of results untenable. Besides, some other issues
rule out the quantitative aggregation of results, and the search for potential
variables explaining the disparity of results, including:
– The diﬀerent practices applied in tandem with TDD . For example, while
TDD and pair programming were applied together in some studies (e.g.,
[P11,P15]), other studies applied TDD either together with other agile
practices (e.g., [P14]), or merely as a part of custom-made development pro-
5 The outlier observed in [P35] may have been due to the small number of participants,
and the larger variability of results expected in small sample sizes [14].

--- PDF page 11 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 11
cesses (e.g., [P26]). Thus, the aggregation of the results of these studies—
each applying diﬀerent practices in tandem with TDD—to provide joint
conclusions would be tantamount to mixing apples and oranges [10]. This
may aﬀect the reliability of joint results.
– The diﬀerent ways in which quality was measured . While quality is com-
monly measured as the percentage of test battery test cases that pass (e.g.,
[P9,P10,P11,P36]), external quality is measured as the number of defects
that were found in bug tracking systems (e.g., [P3,P23]) in some studies
or as a customized scale as a result of applying scoring templates on the
solutions of the participants (e.g., [P7]) in others. This heterogeneity of re-
sponse variable operationalizations may be an obstacle to the aggregation
of results.
In this study, we followed a diﬀerent approach to others adopted in the
literature with the hope of moving beyond the limitations of aggregating pub-
lished results. In particular, we conducted a family of experiments (versus
running one single empirical study) on TDD (versus applying TDD in tandem
with other approaches) and used identical scales to measure quality across
all of our experiments (versus using diﬀerent metrics to measure quality). We
also trained the participants across all our experiments in identical TDD and
ITL procedures and had them code identical tasks. Thus we were able to
use formal analysis methods to aggregate the results of the experiments (e.g.,
meta-analysis [10] and linear mixed models [11]). We also made some changes
across the experiments. As a result, we were able to assess the extent to which
the characteristics of the experiments may have aﬀected the results. Finally,
assuming that the results in our family are representative of what may be hap-
pening in other studies on TDD, we were able to hypothesize on the variables
potentially behind the disparity in the results observed so far in the literature.
In the following, we outline the design of our family of experiments.
3 Family Design
We report the variables, objectives, and the tasks developed by the participants
in our family of experiments in Section 3.1. We provide an overview of the
characteristics of the experiments in Section 3.2. We focus on the ethics of the
experiments in Section 3.3. We describe participants experience in Section 3.4.
Finally, we discuss the data analysis in Section 3.5
3.1 Variables, Tasks and Objectives
The main factor (independent variable) in our family of experiments is the
development approach, with TDD and ITL (following Tosun et al. [52]) as

--- PDF page 12 ---
12 Adrian Santos et al.
treatments6. ITL is closely related to TDD in terms of constitutive elements
(breaking the speciﬁcation into smaller subtasks, testing, coding, and refac-
toring). ITL diﬀers from TDD regarding the order of these steps (test-last
versus test-ﬁrst, respectively). ITL has been chosen as the control instead of
the waterfall model because in the waterfall model testing is done at the end.
If the result were that TDD performs better than the waterfall model, it could
be because the participants have not tested, and have spent most of the time
coding. This does not happen in the case of ITL, where it is guaranteed that
testing is done at the end of each development cycle.
TDD and ITL were applied by the participants in our experiments to de-
velop at least one out of ﬁve toy tasks : MarsRover (MR), Bowling Scorekeeper
(BSK), MusicPhone (MP), Sudoku (SDK) and Spread-Sheet (SS). As MP and
SDK were only developed in one experiment (i.e., University 1), and SS in two
experiments (i.e., Company 3 and 4), they are not reviewed here for reasons of
space. However, interested readers are referred to the supplementary material
where we provide all speciﬁcations 7.
BSK is a modiﬁed version of Robert Martin’s Bowling Scorekeeper [36].
The goal of the task is to calculate the score of a single bowling game. The
task is algorithm-oriented. BSK does not require prior knowledge of bowl-
ing scoring rules; this knowledge is embedded in the speciﬁcation. MR is a
programming exercise that requires the development of a public interface for
controlling the movement of a ﬁctitious vehicle on a grid with obstacles. MR
is a popular exercise in the agile community to teach and practise unit test-
ing. There is a diﬀerence in the level of granularity of the task speciﬁcations.
While BSK’s speciﬁcations are ﬁne-grained (i.e., detailed speciﬁcations where
the functionality of the task is divided into small chunks that can be atomically
implemented one after another), MR’s speciﬁcations are coarse-grained (i.e.,
less detailed, and without dividing larger functionalities into smaller parts).
We used the same speciﬁcations for BSK and MR in our experiments as were
used in previous TDD experiments in the literature [P9],[15,20,52]. The size
of the MR and BSK programs that we—the experimenters—developed is 295
LOC and LOC respectively. We discuss the trade-oﬀs of using toy tasks in the
threats to validity section.
The main response variable (dependent variable) within the family is
external quality. As usual in the TDD literature, we measure external quality
as the percentage of successful tests in the test battery—ortest oracle [8]—that
we (i.e., the experimenters) built to test participant solutions. The participants
had no access to these test oracles. We measured external quality as:
QLT Y = #T ests(P ass)
#T ests(All) ∗ 100%
6 Throughout the rest of the paper we refer to thetreatment—terminology commonly used
in experimental design and data analysis [11,23,26,58]—and the development approach (i.e.,
either ITL or TDD) interchangeably.
7 https://github.com/GRISE-UPM/FiDiPro ESEIL TDD.

--- PDF page 13 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 13
We consider this to be an appropriate measure of external quality, since
when measured from a functional viewpoint, it would be equivalent for both
ITL and TDD.
We built a diﬀerent test oracle to test each task. We used the same test
oracle to measure the external quality of the code produced by all participants.
When tests failed due to trivial errors in the code, we corrected it. Table 2
shows the total number of test cases that make up the MR and BSK test
oracles, testing statement coverage and branch coverage 8 [38], and mutation
score9 [24] for an implementation that we—the experimenters—coded for each
task based on their speciﬁcations.
T able 2 Test oracles for MR and BSK.
T ask Number Statement Branch Mutation
of tests coverage coverage score
MR 52 100% 84.9% 82%
BSK 48 100% 96.4% 94%
Finally, we deﬁne the objective of our family of experiments following the
Goal-Question-Metric (GQM) paradigm proposed by Basili et al. [4] as follows:
GQM. Analyze TDD and ITL for the purpose of comparison with respect
to external quality from the point of view of the researcher in the context
of TDD novices coding toy tasks in controlled experiments .
3.2 Design of the Experiments
We embedded all our industrial experiments within TDD training courses so
as to increase their appeal to practitioners [54], even though this approach has
its own shortcomings. As experiments are embedded within training courses,
the professionals attending the experiments are TDD novices. None of the par-
ticipants reported having any TDD or ITL experience in our questionnaire 10.
The decision to embed experiments within training courses forced us to make
certain design decisions.
First, the professionals attending the training courses needed to apply both
ITL and TDD—as otherwise, they might complain that they did not exercise
all the development approaches taught during the course. Thus, we had to
rely on within-subjects designs for all our industrial experiments. Second, as
all the participants needed to exercise both development approaches, we had to
8 Both measured with eclEmma: https://www.eclemma.org/
9 Measured with muJava: https://cs.gmu.edu/ oﬀutt/mujava/
10 Note that the fact that participants do not have any ITL and TDD experience does
not mean that they have no software testing experience. ITL and TDD have to do with
knowledge of slicing and not with knowledge of testing. Therefore, participants with testing
experience might conceivably have no experience with either ITL and/or TDD.

--- PDF page 14 ---
14 Adrian Santos et al.
T able 3 Family of experiments on TDD: experimental designs (ordered by experimental
design).
ID Experiment N Design Participant T ask Environment
Type
1 University 1 16 Within Students MR, BSK, Java, JUnit, Eclipse
SDK, MP
2 Company 1 18 Within Professionals MR, BSK Java, JUnit, Eclipse
3 Company 2 20 Within Professionals MR, BSK C++, Boost, Eclipse, Vim
4 University 2 48 Within Students MR, BSK Java, JUnit, Eclipse
5 University 3 53 Within Students MR, BSK Java, JUnit, Eclipse
6 Company 3 8 Within Professionals MR, BSK, Java, JUnit, Eclipse
SS
7 Company 4 13 Within Professionals MR, BSK, C#, GxUnit, GeneXus
SS
8 University 4 20 Crossover Students MR, BSK Java, JUnit, Eclipse
9 University 5 41 Between Students BSK Java, JUnit, Eclipse
10 University 6 69 Between Students BSK C#, NUnit, Visual Studio
11 University 7 64 Between Students BSK C#, NUnit, Visual Studio
12 University 8 41 Between Students MR, BSK Java, JUnit, Eclipse
make the participants code diﬀerent tasks with each development approach—
as otherwise, successive attempts at coding the same task could boost their
performance, regardless of the development approach applied. As a result, we
had to introduce more than one task in our industrial experiments.
Having these requirements in mind, we decided to design all our industrial
experiments as AB within-subjects experiments (see Table 4). We decided
to run AB within-subjects experiments—instead of crossover experiments (see
Table 5)—as they ﬁtted the structure of a training course better. In particular,
thanks to this design, we were able to train participants in ITL on the ﬁrst day
and in TDD on the last day, running the experimental session to assess the
performance of each development approach immediately after each training
session. Note that the companies mainly see a course. Therefore, we had to
prioritize a design that was as least disturbing as possible for training purposes.
T able 4 AB within-subjects design.
Group Day 1 (ITL) Day 2 (TDD)
G1 Task 1 Task 2
G2 Task 2 Task 1
Even though an AB within-subjects design suited the structure of our
training courses, this design has a major shortcoming: the order in which the
development approaches are applied may distort results [58]. This is because
the participants may learn something during the ﬁrst session (in this case, the
ITL session) that could boost their performance in the second session (in this

--- PDF page 15 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 15
T able 5 Crossover design.
Group Day 1 (T ask 1) Day 2 (T ask 2)
G1 ITL TDD
G2 TDD ITL
case, the TDD session). For example, they may learn how to code in short
iterations in the ﬁrst session, which could boost their performance with TDD.
In order to assess the extent to which the order of application distorted the
results, we compared the results of our AB within-subjects experiments with
the outcome of a crossover experiment that we ran (see below).
We had more degrees of freedom for the design of the experiments in
academia. In particular, and as these experiments were part of longer pro-
gramming courses, we could run both within-subjects and between-subjects
experiments. We ran between-subjects experiments (i.e., experiments in which
each participant applies just one development approach, either TDD or ITL)
for the experiments where we expected more participants. By running between-
subjects experiments, we were able to assess the extent to which applying one
development approach, instead of two, aﬀected the results. We designed the
rest of our experiments in academia as either AB within-subjects experiments
or as a crossover experiment.
Finally, we adapted the programming environments to the requirements of
our host intuitions. These adaptations are a double-edged sword: on the one
side, they may lead to heterogeneity of results (as if the programming envi-
ronments are diﬀerent, the results of the experiments may also be diﬀerent);
on the other side, they also represent an opportunity to increase the external
validity of the results (as TDD is evaluated in diﬀerent programming environ-
ments) and to increase the internal validity of the results (as the performance
of participants forced to use an unfamiliar programming environment could
be aﬀected).
In all experiments, participants had two and a half hours to develop each
experimental task. One experimental task corresponds to one experimental
session. Participants work individually on each experimental task. To avoid a
possible eﬀect of language, the experiment is run in English only when the par-
ticipants are ﬂuent in it (i.e., companies where developers use English in their
daily work, university courses taught in English, or university courses where
a certain level of English is required). Otherwise, it is run in the participants’
mother tongue (this was the case for University 3 and Company 4).
Table 3 summarizes the characteristics of the experiments in our family.
To ease the visualization of the data in Table 3, we grouped the experiments
by experimental design.

--- PDF page 16 ---
16 Adrian Santos et al.
3.3 Ethics
All participants are aware that they are participating in an experiment measur-
ing the quality of their solutions. Participation is voluntary in all experiments
except University 6 and University 7. In all companies and University 1, par-
ticipants are enrolled in a training course about TDD. Students in University
2, University 3, University 4, University 5 and University 8 participate in a
voluntary exercise. In University 6 and University 7, the experiment is aligned
with the teaching goals of the course.
In University 1, University 4 and University 8, the participation in the
experiment automatically implied giving consent for using the participants’
data for analysis. In University 2, University 3, University 5, university 6 and
University 7 a written consent was signed. Note that the GitHub repository
contains only the code of those participants who gave us consent.
We assured participants before running the experiments that their data
would be anonymized so that they could not be identiﬁed by any means. Ac-
cording to the guide on good data protection practice in research11, an eﬀective
anonymization solution prevents all parties from singling out an individual in
a dataset. The suggested procedures for anonymization are: 1) use random and
unpredictable pseudonyms, 2) make sure the number of pseudonyms possible
is so large that the same pseudonym is never randomly selected twice. Our
anonymization procedure consists of two steps:
1. We provided our contact person in each company with the format of the
IDs to be generated. We explained them that we neither want to know
the participants’ names, nor the link between the IDs and the people.
Participants were requested to use their IDs during the whole experiment.
2. We applied the (irreversible) cryptographic hash function MD5 to the IDs
generated by the companies.
This two-step procedure guarantees that neither the general public, nor the
companies, nor the researchers know who the participants are. Therefore, the
link between an individual subject and a performance measure in our dataset
is completely lost. For the case of the experiments run with students, it is
possible that the researchers who conducted that speciﬁc experiment know
who they are, but neither the rest of the researchers involved in this project,
nor the general public.
3.4 Participants
Participants were handed a survey some days before the experiments took
place. The survey contained a series of self-assessment questions that asked
the participants about their experience with programming, unit testing, the
programming language, and the testing tool to be used during the experiment.
11 https://www.eui.eu/documents/servicesadmin/deanofstudies/researchethics/guide-
data-protection-research.pdf

--- PDF page 17 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 17
We followed an approach similar to the one suggested by Falessi et al. [16]
to measure the real participant experience. In particular, we designed each
question so it could be answered on an ordinal scale (inexperienced if the
participants had less than 2 years of experience, novice if the participants
had between 2 to 5 years of experience, intermediate if the participants had
between 5 to 10 years of experience, and expert if the participants had more
than 10 years of experience).
After using this questionnaire in several experiments (University 1, 4 and
8, and Company 1 and 2), we realized that the periods of time that we at-
tached to each level of experience (experience of less than 2 years, 2 years to
5 years, 5 to 10 years, and greater than 10 years) were not suitable for distin-
guishing participants with completely diﬀerent experience. Indeed, according
to this scale, most of the participants to fell into identical experience levels
(as there were hardly any participants with more than 5 years of unit testing
or testing tool experience). In turn, these scales were not ﬁne-grained enough
to distinguish between diﬀerently experienced participants, even if they used
unit testing and testing tools as frequently as each other.
In view of this, and as no consensus seems to have been reached yet on how
best to measure developer experience in SE [7,16,17], we decided to remove
the time periods that we had allotted to each experience level. In fact, we
adopted a similar approach to the one suggested by Feigenspan et al. [17] to
measure participant experience in the rest of experiments that we ran (Uni-
versity 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7, and Company 3 and 4): with self-assessment questions
on an ordinal scale (inexperienced, novice, intermediate and experts) without
time-associated experience levels. Although this decision helped us to better
describe participants (as it provided for a greater variability of participant
responses—see below), this change of scales had an impact on the possibility
of assessing the eﬀect of participant experience in the joint meta-analysis of
results. In particular, joint meta-analyses run the risk of mixing apples and
oranges, as participant experience was measured diﬀerently across the exper-
iments. We discuss the trade-oﬀs of this decision in the threats to validity
section.
Figure 1 shows the proﬁle plot illustrating the mean participant experience
in the experiments using the ﬁrst type of questionnaire. Figure 2 shows the
proﬁle plot for participant experience using the second type of questionnaire.
For simplicity’s sake, we consider here, for merely descriptive purposes, that
inexperienced, novice, intermediate and expert correspond to 1, 2, 3 and 4,
respectively, and that experience is measured on a continuous rather than
an ordinal scale. This approach is typically followed in other disciplines [39].
Participant TDD and ITL experience has not been included in Figures 1 and
2 because participants had no previous experience with TDD or ITL.
We ﬁnd in both Figure 1 and Figure 2 that participants claimed to have
more programming than programming language experience during the exper-
iment. Also, participants claimed to be more experienced with programming
or the programming language than with unit testing or the testing tool used
during the experiment. Besides, while participant experience across the exper-

--- PDF page 18 ---
18 Adrian Santos et al.
Fig. 1 Proﬁle plot: participant experience with ﬁrst questionnaire.
Inexperienced
Novice
Intermediate
Expert
Programming Language Unit Test Testing Tool
Mean experience
EXPERIMENT
Company 1
Company 2
University 1
University 4
University 8
Fig. 2 Proﬁle plot: participant experience with second questionnaire.
Inexperienced
Novice
Intermediate
Expert
Programming Language Unit Test Testing Tool
Mean experience
EXPERIMENT
Company 3
Company 4
University 2
University 3
University 5
University 6
University 7
iments in Figure 1 is jammed together (as, remember, most of the participants
using the ﬁrst type of questionnaire reported having similar levels of experi-
ence because experience was associated with years of practice), the spread of
participant experience is less pronounced than in Figure 2. Finally, while the
participants with the greatest programming experience are based at Company
2 in Figure 1 and at Company 4 in Figure 2 (i.e., professionals in both cases),
there is a tendency for professionals to consider themselves less skilled than
students in some cases (e.g., notice that the programming language experience
line at University 1 is above that of Companies 1 and 2 in Figure 1 or that the
line for all experience variables, except programming experience, at Company
4 is lower than in most experiments with students in Figure 2). This must be
taken into consideration for exploratory analysis purposes, as it may have an
impact on their results.
None of the professionals claimed to have any prior experience with ei-
ther ITL or TDD. As the experiments were embedded within training courses
on TDD and ITL, the professionals would have skipped the course—and the
experiment altogether—if they had had any previous experience in these de-
velopment approaches. Considering that course attendance was optional, pro-
fessionals already familiar with TDD and ITL may have not seen any beneﬁt
in taking time out to attend the course and take part in the experiment.
As a summary, according to the results of the questionnaires and our per-
ceptions while running the experiments, the sample of participants in our
family had disparate programming, programming language, unit testing and

--- PDF page 19 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 19
testing tool experience. Additionally, and as all the experiments were embed-
ded within training courses, all the participants were absolute TDD novices.
3.5 Analysis Approach
As regards RQ1, we ﬁrst provide the descriptive statistics (sample sizes,
means, standard deviations and medians [18]) of the quality scores achieved
with TDD and ITL in each experiment. With the aim of easing the understand-
ing of the data, we then round out the descriptive statistics with a proﬁle plot
showing the mean quality scores achieved with ITL and TDD in each exper-
iment. Afterwards, we report the joint result for all the experiments together
output by a two-stage individual participant data (IPD) meta-analysis [43]. In
particular, we ﬁrst analyze the data of each between-subjects experiment with
an independent t-test [18], and the data of each within-subjects experiment
with a dependent t-test [18]. Then, we combine the estimates provided by the
t-tests (i.e., the diﬀerence between the means of the TDD and ITL groups),
and their respective standard errors by means of random-eﬀects (RE) model
meta-analysis [10]. We adopted this approach as it allows us to:
– Combine the results of experiments with diﬀerent experimental designs
into a joint conclusion.
– Transparently weight each experiment in the joint result according to the
standard error of its estimate.
– Provide visual summaries of results (i.e., forest plots [10]).
– Incorporate heterogeneity by simply ﬁtting a random-eﬀects model instead
of a ﬁxed-eﬀects model [10].
– Assess heterogeneity with relatively straightforward means: the Q-test or
the I 2 statistic. Q tests the null hypothesis that all studies share a common
eﬀect size. I 2 determines what proportion of the observed variance is real
(if it is near zero, almost all the observed variance is spurious, and there
is nothing to explain; if it is large, it would make sense to speculate about
reasons for, and try to explain, the variance). I 2 is interpreted as: 25% low,
50% medium and 75% high [10].
Regarding RQ2, we consider the data of MR and BSK only. The partici-
pants in the experiments of our family were seldom set the SDK, MP and SS
tasks. Therefore, we did not have suﬃcient data to get accurate results (we
acknowledge the limitations of this decision in the threats to validity section).
We analyze the data by means of a one-stage IPD meta-analysis [43]; in partic-
ular, we ﬁt linear mixed models [11]. As we did in the previous meta-analysis,
we allow for heterogeneity of results by considering the treatment as a random
eﬀect across the experiments. To assess the inﬂuence of task on quality we ﬁt
a linear mixed model with the main eﬀects of treatment and task and their
interaction. To ease the understanding of the results, we provide the respec-
tive ANOVA tables [18] and marginal means [18] for each analysis. We use a
one-stage IPD meta-analysis rather than a two-stage IPD meta-analysis (as
we did before) because [11,43]:

--- PDF page 20 ---
20 Adrian Santos et al.
– It is useful for assessing the eﬀect of multiple variables on results at once
(e.g., the main eﬀects for treatment and task, and their interaction).
– It outputs personalized contrasts for interpreting the results (e.g., what is
the expected quality with either TDD or ITL for the average number of
tests developed by the participants?).
– It accommodates missing data so that participants with missing scores can
still contribute to the joint result (e.g., by ﬁtting linear mixed models [11]).
We analyze RQ3 by means of RE model sub-group meta-analysis [10]. We
round out each of the sub-group meta-analyses that we perform with an IPD
one-stage linear mixed model with interaction terms [11]. We use linear mixed
models to provide marginal means and, thus, ease the interpretation of the
results. In the following, for each variable that we study (i.e., participant type,
programming environment, etc.), we report the results of the sub-group meta-
analysis that we performed, its corresponding forest plot, and the marginal
means that we calculated from the linear mixed model. We adopt this approach
as it allows us to:
– Visually convey the results by means of forest plots [10].
– Relatively straightforwardly interpret the heterogeneity of the results (e.g.,
using the Q-test or the I 2 statistic [10]).
Finally, we analyze RQ4 by means of a one-stage IPD meta-analysis, as
we did for RQ2, for the same reasons. As above, we account for heterogeneity
of results by considering the treatment as a random eﬀect across the experi-
ments. To assess the inﬂuence of participant characteristics on quality, we ﬁt
four diﬀerent linear mixed models (one for each of the four characteristics) as
speciﬁed in [19], with the main treatment eﬀects and the respective charac-
teristic, their interaction, and the interaction between the treatment and the
mean experience in each experiment. To ease the understanding of the results,
we report the ANOVA p-values, marginal means, and proﬁle plots for the in-
teraction between treatment and participant characteristic. Separate analyses
are performed for students and professionals, and for the two diﬀerent types
of questionnaires used in the experiments, as, according to Section 3.4, they
could be inﬂuencing the results.
4 RQ1: ITL vs. TDD
Throughout this section, we answer RQ1: Do TDD and ITL perform similarly
in terms of quality? To do so, we present the descriptive statistics of the data
in Section 4.1, the results of the joint analysis in Section 4.2, and discuss our
ﬁndings, which we frame within the results of the identiﬁed primary studies
on TDD, in Section 4.3.

--- PDF page 21 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 21
4.1 Descriptive Statistics
Table 6 shows the sample sizes (N), means, standard deviations (SD) and me-
dians of the quality scores achieved with ITL and TDD in all the experiments
within our family (in the same order as in Table 3). As we can see, the mean
quality achieved with ITL goes from as high as M = 68.28 at Company 1 to
as low as M = 22.84 at Company 4, while the means for TDD go from as high
as M = 67.64 at Company 3 to as low as M = 10.68 at Company 4.
T able 6 Summary statistics for quality by experiment and development approach.
Experiment T reatment N Mean SD Median
University 1 ITL 16 32 .12 29 .94 24 .11
TDD 14 31 .85 21 .79 24 .56
Company 1 ITL 16 68 .28 34 .27 85 .71
TDD 17 42 .50 39 .32 42 .70
Company 2 ITL 20 41 .61 31 .66 50 .75
TDD 20 38 .28 22 .45 33 .33
University 2 ITL 44 65 .34 30 .08 76 .56
TDD 43 36 .24 28 .80 39 .33
University 3 ITL 49 26 .52 18 .11 23 .44
TDD 52 32 .36 25 .05 33 .26
Company 3 ITL 8 50 .42 32 .76 46 .36
TDD 6 67 .64 26 .24 70 .77
Company 4 ITL 12 22 .84 20 .57 17 .12
TDD 11 10 .69 14 .75 7 .86
University 4 ITL 20 38 .20 31 .16 39 .43
TDD 20 41 .42 35 .58 35 .79
University 5 ITL 16 43 .86 23 .85 52 .68
TDD 18 39 .35 25 .03 29 .46
University 6 ITL 33 37 .12 30 .08 29 .69
TDD 38 39 .52 27 .48 29 .69
University 7 ITL 35 44 .96 28 .97 23 .44
TDD 28 34 .26 20 .53 23 .44
University 8 ITL 20 37 .42 39 .31 22 .22
TDD 21 29 .24 36 .66 5 .62
Figure 3 shows the proﬁle plot for the mean quality scores achieved with
ITL and TDD in all the experiments12. As we can see, the means for TDD and
ITL are clustered between 50 and 25 in most experiments. Additionally, the
slope of the lines in these experiments (i.e., the diﬀerence between the mean
performance achieved with TDD and ITL) is more or less ﬂat. In other words,
TDD and ITL appear to perform similarly in these experiments. However,
some experiments have relatively larger slopes (i.e., Universities 3 and 5 and
Companies 1 and 3), where the diﬀerences between TDD and ITL are more
noticeable.
12 We analyzed the data with t-tests. Therefore, the mean diﬀerence (i.e., the slope of the
line) provides useful information for evaluating experiment results.

--- PDF page 22 ---
22 Adrian Santos et al.
Fig. 3 Proﬁle plot: ITL and TDD mean quality.
0
25
50
75
100
ITL TDD
Treatment
QLTY
EXPERIMENT
Company 1
Company 2
Company 3
Company 4
University 1
University 2
University 3
University 4
University 5
University 6
University 7
University 8
4.2 Analysis for ITL vs. TDD
Fig. 4 Forest plot: TDD vs. ITL mean eﬀects.
−60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60
Effect Size
University 8
University 7
University 6
University 5
University 4
Company 4
Company 3
University 3
University 2
Company 2
Company 1
University 1
 −8.18 [−31.43,  15.07]
−10.69 [−23.40,   2.02]
  2.39 [−11.00,  15.79]
 −4.51 [−21.00,  11.97]
  3.22 [−20.62,  27.07]
−13.36 [−22.25,  −4.46]
 17.08 [−14.36,  48.51]
  5.64 [ −3.14,  14.42]
−28.61 [−38.03, −19.20]
 −3.34 [−20.25,  13.58]
−26.51 [−46.09,  −6.93]
 −0.80 [−17.76,  16.15]
 −7.09 [−14.48,   0.30]
TDD<ITL TDD>ITLExperiment Effect Size [95% CI]
RE Model (Q = 39.38, p = 0.00; I2 = 67.6%)
Figure 4 shows the forest plot for the RE model meta-analysis that we
performed. It shows that ITL achieves higher quality than TDD in most ex-
periments (as the estimate for these experiments is on the left-hand side of the
ﬁgure). In only three experiments (i.e., Companies 1 and 4, and University 2),
however, is the diﬀerence in performance between ITL and TDD statistically
signiﬁcant (statistical signiﬁcance holds when the 95% conﬁdence intervals—
95% CI—of the estimate do not cross 0). When pooling together all the es-
timates by means of meta-analysis (see the black diamond at the bottom),
ITL achieves higher quality than TDD ( M = −7.06, 95% CI =(-14.47, 0.35)).
However, this diﬀerence in performance is not statistically signiﬁcant (as the
95% CI crosses 0), and small —considering that M = −7.06 is a small drop in
performance compared to the full range of quality scores that can be achieved
(i.e., 100% to 0%). Additionally, there is a medium heterogeneity of results
(I 2=67.8%, Q-statistic=39.70, p-value=<0.001) according to commonly used
rules of thumb [10].

--- PDF page 23 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 23
Key ﬁndings
– The joint result shows that TDD novices coding toy tasks achieve slightly
better quality scores with ITL than with TDD.
– The results vary largely across the individual experiments.
4.3 Discussion
The participants achieve low quality scores overall, regardless of the treatment,
despite the fact that they are coding toy tasks. However, the standard devia-
tion is also large. We hypothesize that the low experience of the participants
could explain their low quality scores. More precisely, the testing experience
might have played a critical role. Participants must write test cases regardless
of the treatment being applied. If their unit testing experience is low, the over-
head caused by writing the test cases could have reduced the time necessary
to produce high quality code.
ITL quality is slightly higher than for TDD in our family of experiments.
However, this diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁcant. Nonetheless, as the
95% CI of the joint result in our family (i.e., the black diamond at the bottom
of the forest-plot) is very narrow—at least compared to the 95% CI of the
individual experiments—running another experiment and adding its results to
the outcomes of our family is unlikely to make much diﬀerence the joint result
much. In particular, as we already conducted a joint meta-analysis of the data
of 12 experiments in our family, our experiments would have a relatively greater
weight than an isolated experiment in the joint result of any prospective meta-
analysis (unless, of course, a huge experiment was added to our family [10]).
Consequently, the joint results would be similar to the ﬁndings for our family.
Our joint results (i.e., the control approach achieved slightly higher quality
than TDD) are consistent with ﬁndings reported in other experiments on TDD
where MSc students developed toy tasks in experiments spanning days or
weeks [P22,P36]. Additionally, the results achieved at Company 3 (i.e., quality
for TDD is slightly higher than for the control approach) are also consistent
with the outcomes of other experiments with professionals published in the
literature (i.e., [P10]). However, Company 3 results should be interpreted with
caution, at least in view of the wide 95% CI that materialized (meaning that
many other results may be compatible with the data). The extreme results
for Company 3 may be due to small sample size, where natural variability is
highly likely to be behind the outliers.
When comparing the results of our family with the ﬁndings of the exper-
iments on TDD published so far, we conclude that there does not appear to
be much diﬀerence for TDD novices between TDD and the control approach
(since the diﬀerence in our family is small, as are the both positive and nega-
tive diﬀerences in most of the published experiments). Thus, to date, at least,
TDD novices seem to perform similarly or slightly better with the control ap-
proach than with TDD in experiments . This contrasts with the results usually

--- PDF page 24 ---
24 Adrian Santos et al.
reported in case studies, where vast improvements are usually achieved with
TDD (ranging from 22% [P8] to 267% [P35]). We hypothesize that at least
the following reasons may be inﬂuencing this disparity.
First, we think that the duration of the studies may be inﬂuencing the re-
sults. In particular, as experiments usually span only a few days or weeks and
case studies usually span months or years, case study participants beneﬁt more
from TDD as a result of a longer exposure to the approach. In other words,
TDD may only show its beneﬁts after it has been internalized by developers,
and this process may take more than a few days or weeks. To check this hy-
pothesis, we propose to run further experiments with TDD novices that have
been trained in, and have used, TDD for several months (or at least weeks)
before the experiment takes place. We also propose to run experiments with
TDD experts vs. control approach (e.g., waterfall model or ITL) experts to em-
ulate the case study situation—where participants are already knowledgeable
about both development approaches.
Second, we single out the unit of analysis (i.e., solo, pair programming, or
teams) as a possible reason behind the diﬀerent results reported in the litera-
ture. According to the results that we observed in the literature at least, the
studies that measured quality for the whole development team (i.e., measured
the quality of a system after it had been developed by a team of developers)
achieved more optimistic results for TDD than others that measured quality
just for solo or pair programmers. To check this hypothesis, we propose to run
further experiments to compare the performance of solo programmers, pair
programmers and teams with TDD again to emulate the case study situation.
Third, we think that the mixed proﬁle of the participants in case studies
(diﬀerent participants have diﬀerent experience levels) is another possible rea-
son for the diﬀerence in the results that we observed between the literature
and our family of experiments.
Fourth, the real beneﬁts of TDD could be due to short development cycles
rather than test-ﬁrst development. This has been observed by Fucci et al.
[20] in one of the experiments cited in this paper. This would explain why
TDD performs better when the waterfall model, instead of ITL, is used as the
control.
Finally, we should underscore the fact that, despite our attempts to keep
the experimental conﬁgurations of the experiments as alike as possible (al-
though we were obliged to adapt their programming environments and change
their experimental designs at times), there was still a noticeable heterogeneity
of outcomes within our family. This indicates that there is a slight incon-
sistency across the results of the diﬀerent studies. Consequently, moderator
variables that could be aﬀecting the outcomes need to be studied, as hetero-
geneity suggests that the characteristics of the experiments may be impacting
their results. In the following, we try to identify the extent to which the diﬀer-
ent characteristics of the experiments are causing the detected heterogeneity
of results.
We do not think that companies developing diﬀerent types of software per-
form diﬀerently. While Company 1 and Company 3 develop betting software

--- PDF page 25 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 25
for online gaming, Company 2 develops electronics software, and Company
4 develops software for supplies management (water, internet, telephone and
television). If this were the case, Company 1 and Company 3 should show con-
sistent results. But according to Figure 4, Company 1 and Company 3 have
very diﬀerent results. However, this could be explained also by the low sample
size of Company 3. On the other hand, Company 1, Company 2 and Company
4 seem to show consistent results.
Even though we do not focus on the length and rhythm of the development
cycles with TDD (see [20] for an extended discussion on this point), our results
appear to be consistent with the observations made by Karac and Turhan
[29]. In particular, both TDD and ITL perform similarly within our family
of experiments. Besides, working on small, well-deﬁned tasks (such as BSK,
rather than MR) also seems to translate into higher external quality.
5 RQ2: Task
Throughout this section we answer RQ2: To what extent is quality aﬀected by
the task under development? We think that this is a relevant issue. Although
MR and BSK are of similar complexity, their speciﬁcations do not have the
same granularity (BSK is ﬁne-grained, while MR is coarse-grained). This could
beneﬁt either (ITL or TDD) or both of the approaches in terms of quality. In
order to answer this research question, we present the descriptive statistics
and the analysis for the task in Section 5.1. Then, we discuss and compare our
ﬁndings with the outcomes published in the literature in Section 5.2.
5.1 Analysis for Task
Table 7 shows the sample sizes (N), means, standard deviations (SD) and
medians of the quality scores achieved with each task in all the experiments
within our family (experiments are organized in the same order as in Table
3). The mean quality achieved with BSK goes from as high as M = 65.34 at
University 2 to as low as M = 23 .81 at Company 4. The means for MR go
from as high as M = 67.11 at Company 3 to as low as M = 7.46 at University
8.
Table 8 shows the ANOVA table corresponding to the analysis that we
undertook to assess the inﬂuence of task and treatment on quality. As we can
see, the task under development has a statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect on qual-
ity. This suggests that the task being developed inﬂuences quality consistently
(i.e., either increasing or decreasing the quality scores achieved with both de-
velopment approaches), meaning that participants achieve higher quality in
some tasks compared to others. Besides, as the interaction between the task
and the treatment is not statistically signiﬁcant, this means that the task un-
der development is not responsible for the diﬀerence in performance between
TDD and ITL—as, after all, the task has a similar impact (either increasing
or decreasing) on the quality scores of both development approaches.

--- PDF page 26 ---
26 Adrian Santos et al.
T able 7 Summary statistics for quality by experiment and task.
Experiment T ask N Mean SD Median
University 1
MR 8 10 .96 17 .31 2 .81
BSK 8 50 .22 24 .94 43 .75
MP 7 25 .44 13 .21 24 .39
SDK 7 41 .76 28 .73 23 .08
Company 1 MR 16 44 .24 39 .34 45 .51
BSK 17 65 .13 36 .25 83 .93
Company 2 MR 20 53 .53 25 .55 63 .73
BSK 20 26 .36 21 .71 22 .14
University 2 MR 43 36 .24 28 .80 39 .33
BSK 44 65 .34 30 .08 76 .56
University 3 MR 48 17 .37 16 .27 9 .55
BSK 53 40 .54 20 .86 32 .81
Company 3
MR 6 67 .11 40 .02 81 .46
BSK 4 58 .48 26 .10 59 .82
SS 4 43 .16 13 .45 46 .36
Company 4
MR 8 12 .64 14 .89 8 .43
BSK 7 23 .81 26 .64 12 .82
SS 8 15 .48 14 .00 10 .71
University 4 MR 20 17 .74 24 .87 7 .30
BSK 20 61 .89 24 .46 70 .18
University 5 BSK 34 41 .47 24 .22 45 .54
University 6 BSK 71 38 .40 28 .54 29 .69
University 7 BSK 63 40 .20 25 .93 23 .44
University 8 MR 22 7 .46 20 .54 0 .56
BSK 19 63 .07 30 .30 76 .19
T able 8 ANOVA table for quality: task by treatment.
F actor Chisq Df p-value
Treatment 1.148 1 0.28
Task 60.05 1 <.001
Treatment:Task 0.08 1 0.78
We complement the results of the ANOVA table with the marginal means of
the interaction (i.e., the average quality scores achieved with each combination
of task and treatment) in Table 9.
T able 9 Marginal means for quality: task by treatment.
T ask T reatment Estimate 95% CI
MR ITL 29.36 (17.65, 41.06)
TDD 24.95 (16.95, 32.97)
BSK ITL 49.22 (39.13, 59.30)
TDD 46.46 (38.92, 54.01)
As we can see in Table 9, the quality scores achieved for MR are consid-
erably lower than those achieved for BSK with both development approaches.
Besides, the diﬀerence in performance between ITL and TDD for both tasks is

--- PDF page 27 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 27
small—although ITL achieves slightly higher quality than TDD for both MR
and BSK. The diﬀerence in the level of detail of the speciﬁcations may have
boosted the performance of the participants when developing BSK (see [28]
for further research on this issue).
Key ﬁndings
– Some tasks lead to higher quality scores than others regardless of the
development approach applied.
– The task under development does not appear to be responsible for the
diﬀerence in quality between TDD and ITL.
5.2 Discussion of Task
As we have seen, the task being developed seems to aﬀect consistently—either
increasing or decreasing—the quality scores achieved with both TDD and ITL.
The reason for this could be tasks having diﬀerent intrinsic properties that
cause some tasks having a greater design complexity/diﬃculty than others.
For example, the MR speciﬁcation is coarse-grained and BSK is ﬁne-grained.
This could explain why BSK gets a better performance. These results are in
line with those of Tosun et al. [53]. On the other hand, there does not appear
to be any combination of task and development approach that boosts quality.
This has certain implications. First, as the task being developed seems
to aﬀect quality similarly regardless of the development approach applied,
the task cannot be blamed for the diﬀerence in performance between TDD
and the control approach. Extrapolating this ﬁnding to the results published
in the literature of TDD, we hypothesize that as long as the same task is
developed with TDD and the control approach, the task is unlikely to be behind
the heterogeneity of results observed so far. However, as quality largely depends
upon the developed task, if a diﬀerent task is developed with each development
approach (e.g., Task 1-ITL, Task 2-TDD), this may lead to completely diﬀerent
quality scores. This may have happened to us before in one of our experiments
on TDD [52], where, although we thought that BSK and MR were similar,
TDD-BSK clearly outperformed ITL-MR. Now that we have decoupled the
eﬀect of the task and the treatment in our experiments, we ﬁnd that the task
determines quality to a larger extent than the actual development approach.
Finding that the task being developed has a noticeable inﬂuence on quality
has implications in terms of experimental design. In particular, as quality is
largely dependent upon the task developed, if diﬀerent tasks are developed in
an experiment, the variability of the quality scores will increase (as either large
or small quality scores will be achieved). Thus, if we run a between-subjects
experiment, where diﬀerent tasks are implemented within each treatment, the
variability of the quality scores in each treatment will rise, whereas the statis-
tical power will plummet. This will result in wider 95% CIs (i.e., less precise
results) for the experiment [14,18], the eﬀects of which are shown in the for-

--- PDF page 28 ---
28 Adrian Santos et al.
Fig. 5 Forest plot: students vs. professionals
−60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60
Effect Size
Company 4
Company 3
Company 2
Company 1
University 8
University 7
University 6
University 5
University 4
University 3
University 2
University 1
−13.36 [−22.25,  −4.46]
 17.08 [−14.36,  48.51]
 −3.34 [−20.25,  13.58]
−26.51 [−46.09,  −6.93]
 −8.18 [−31.43,  15.07]
−10.69 [−23.40,   2.02]
  2.39 [−11.00,  15.79]
 −4.51 [−21.00,  11.97]
  3.22 [−20.62,  27.07]
  5.64 [ −3.14,  14.42]
−28.61 [−38.03, −19.20]
 −0.80 [−17.76,  16.15]
 −7.09 [−14.48,   0.30]
Students
−5.86 [−15.07, 3.36]
Professionals
−10.05 [−22.54, 2.45]
TDD<ITL TDD>ITLExperiment Effect Size [95% CI]
RE Model (Q = 39.38, p = 0.00; I2 = 67.6%)
RE Model subgroup (Q = 31.72, p = 0.00; I2 = 71.0%)
RE Model subgroup (Q = 6.49, p = 0.09; I2 = 52.8%)
est plot in Figure 4. In particular, notice how, despite Universities 8 and 5
having identical sample sizes (i.e., 41 participants each), the 95% CI for Uni-
versity 8 (where both BSK and MR were developed with each development
approach) is wider than for University 5 (where only BSK was developed with
each development approach). In view of this, we recommend either the use of
only one task in between-subjects experiments or the substitution of between-
subjects experiments for within-subjects experiments if experimenters want to
evaluate more than one task . If within-subjects experiments are run instead of
between-subjects experiments, the extra variability introduced by the diﬀerent
tasks should cancel out during data analysis. This is because each participant
acts as his or her own baseline in within-subjects experiments, and, thus, the
potential correlation between participant scores may counterbalance the ex-
tra variability introduced by the diﬀerent tasks. Additionally, the low mean
quality achieved with MR at University 8 could be explained by the fact that
University 8 follows a crossover design according to which MR is implemented
in the ﬁrst session and BSK in the second session. The implementation of the
most complex/diﬃcult task in the ﬁrst session could lead to a lower mean.
Note that MP and SDK are used only in one experiment (University 1), and
SS is used in two experiments only (Company 3 and Company 4).
In summary, there is a need for further studies investigating why task
complexity or code visibility impacts quality, along the lines of Tosun et al.
[53].
6 RQ3: Experiment-Level Moderators
Throughout this section, we answer RQ3: To what extent is quality aﬀected
by the characteristics of the experiments: participant type (i.e., professionals
vs. students), programming environment (i.e., Java vs. C++/C# and related
IDEs and testing tools), learning eﬀects from one session to another, or order
of application of ITL and TDD? Note that one of the reasons for conducting
families of experiments is to hypothesize on experiment-level moderators that

--- PDF page 29 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 29
may be inﬂuencing the results [47]. For this purpose, we assess the inﬂuence
of the participant type, programming environment, learning eﬀects, and the
order of application in Sections 6.1, 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4, respectively. We then
discuss and contextualize our ﬁndings in Section 6.5.
6.1 Participant Type
At the beginning of our article, we hypothesized that participant type (i.e.,
students vs. professionals) may be inﬂuencing the results of the studies pub-
lished so far on TDD. In view of this, we studied the impact of participant
type on the results in our family of experiments. Table 10 shows a summary
of the results of the sub-group meta-analysis that we undertook to assess
this point. Figure 5 shows the corresponding forest plot. As Figure 5 and
Table 10 show, the magnitude of the joint result for the students sub-group
(M = −5.82, 95% CI =(-15.06, 3.43)) is smaller than for the professionals
sub-group (M = −10.05, 95% CI =(-22.54, 2.45)).
T able 10 Sub-group meta-analysis: students vs. professionals.
Group N Estimate 95% CI I 2
Students 7 -5.82 (-15.06, 3.43) 71.1%
Professionals 4 -10.05 (-22.54, 2.45) 52.8%
Diﬀerence 4.23 (-38.23, 14.21) -
Additionally, as Table 10 shows, performance for professionals degrades
to a larger extent than for students using TDD (the Diﬀerence row in Ta-
ble 10 indicates that the performance of professionals using TDD drops more
than M = 4.23 points ’on-average’ than for students). Thus, in relative terms,
performance by professionals with TDD drops almost twice as much as for stu-
dents. We also ﬁnd that, although participant type does appear to inﬂuence
results, there is still a noticeable heterogeneity of results in both sub-groups.
Thus, other variables rather than participant type may be inﬂuencing results.
Finally, Table 11 shows the estimated quality scores of students and profes-
sionals divided by the development approach.
T able 11 Marginal means for quality: participant type by treatment.
T reatment Group Estimate 95% CI
ITL Students 40.47 (29.19, 51.75)
Professionals 49.53 (31.66, 67.41)
TDD Students 35.61 (30.37, 40.85)
Professionals 38.26 (28.33, 48.18)

--- PDF page 30 ---
30 Adrian Santos et al.
Fig. 6 Forest plot: programming environment.
−60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60
Effect Size
University 7
University 6
Company 4
Company 2
University 8
University 5
University 4
Company 3
University 3
University 2
Company 1
University 1
−10.69 [−23.40,   2.02]
  2.39 [−11.00,  15.79]
−13.36 [−22.25,  −4.46]
 −3.34 [−20.25,  13.58]
 −8.18 [−31.43,  15.07]
 −4.51 [−21.00,  11.97]
  3.22 [−20.62,  27.07]
 17.08 [−14.36,  48.51]
  5.64 [ −3.14,  14.42]
−28.61 [−38.03, −19.20]
−26.51 [−46.09,  −6.93]
 −0.80 [−17.76,  16.15]
 −7.09 [−14.48,   0.30]
Java environment
−6.91 [−18.06, 4.24]
C environment
−7.57 [−15.12, −0.03]
TDD<ITL TDD>ITLExperiment Effect Size [95% CI]
RE Model (Q = 39.38, p = 0.00; I2 = 67.6%)
RE Model subgroup (Q = 35.22, p = 0.00; I2 = 73.8%)
RE Model subgroup (Q = 4.16, p = 0.25; I2 = 31.9%)
As we can see in Table 11, professionals achieve higher quality than stu-
dents for both TDD and ITL.
Key ﬁndings
– Professionals achieve higher quality than students with both TDD and
ITL.
– However, the drop in performance of professionals applying TDD as
compared to ITL almost doubles that of students.
6.2 Programming Environment
At the beginning of our article, we hypothesized that the programming en-
vironment (i.e., the programming language, IDE, testing tools, etc.) may be
behind the heterogeneity of results observed in the literature. Thus, we as-
sessed the extent to which this may be inﬂuencing results in our family of
experiments. Table 12 summarizes the results of the sub-group meta-analysis
that we undertook to assess the inﬂuence of the programming environment
(i.e., Java/JUnit/Eclipse vs. C++/C# and related technologies 13) on results.
Figure 6 shows the corresponding forest plot. Table 13 shows the estimated
quality scores for the diﬀerent programming environments divided by the de-
velopment approach.
As we can see in Table 12, Figure 6, and Table 13, ITL achieves higher
quality than TDD for both the Java programming environment ( M = −6.86,
95% CI =(-18.05, 4.31)), and the C++/C# programming environment ( M =
−7.57, 95% CI =(-15.11, -0.03)). Additionally, the diﬀerence between the re-
sults achieved with both programming environments is negligible (M = 0.707,
13 In our experiments, the IDEs and testing tools used with C++ and C# are diﬀerent. In
this study, however, we make the simpliﬁcation of considering them as being a part of the
same group of technologies merely for the purposes of comparison.

--- PDF page 31 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 31
T able 12 Sub-group meta-analysis: Java vs. C++/C#.
Group N Estimate 95% CI I 2
Java 8 -6.86 (-18.05, 4.31) 74%
C++/C# 4 -7.57 (-15.11, -0.03) 31.88%
Diﬀerence - 0.707 (-12.78, 14.19) -
T able 13 Marginal means for quality: programming environment by treatment.
T reatment Group Estimate 95% CI
ITL Java 43.83 (32.13, 55.53)
C#/C++ 41.25 (22.25, 60.26)
TDD Java 35.77 (30.08, 41.47)
C#/C++ 37.55 (28.82, 46.29)
Fig. 7 Forest plot: learning eﬀects.
−60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60
Effect Size
University 8
University 7
University 6
University 5
University 4
Company 4
Company 3
University 3
University 2
Company 2
Company 1
University 1
 −8.18 [−31.43,  15.07]
−10.69 [−23.40,   2.02]
  2.39 [−11.00,  15.79]
 −4.51 [−21.00,  11.97]
  3.22 [−20.62,  27.07]
−13.36 [−22.25,  −4.46]
 17.08 [−14.36,  48.51]
  5.64 [ −3.14,  14.42]
−28.61 [−38.03, −19.20]
 −3.34 [−20.25,  13.58]
−26.51 [−46.09,  −6.93]
 −0.80 [−17.76,  16.15]
 −7.09 [−14.48,   0.30]
Within
−7.70 [−18.37, 2.97]
Between
−4.89 [−12.49, 2.71]
TDD<ITL TDD>ITLExperiment Effect Size [95% CI]
RE Model (Q = 39.38, p = 0.00; I2 = 67.6%)
RE Model subgroup (Q = 36.21, p = 0.00; I2 = 78.1%)
RE Model subgroup (Q = 2.02, p = 0.57; I2 = 0.0%)
95% CI =(-12.78, 14.19)). Finally, there is still a considerable amount of het-
erogeneity in the sub-group formed by the experiments with the Java environ-
ment, albeit not as much in the sub-group with C++/C# technologies. We put
this lower I 2 statistic in the C++/C# sub-group down to the small number of
experiments and, thus, to the potentially lower accuracy of theI 2 statistic [51].
Key ﬁndings
The programming environment does not appear to aﬀect the diﬀerence in
performance between TDD and ITL.
6.3 Learning Eﬀects on Treatments
As we acknowledged when discussing the design of our experiments, the partic-
ipants in within-subjects experiments applied not one but both development
approaches. As a result, they could learn something during the ﬁrst session
that could boost their performance in the second session and may inﬂuence the
results achieved. To assess the extent to which this was the case in our family

--- PDF page 32 ---
32 Adrian Santos et al.
of experiments, we compared the results of the experiments where the partici-
pants applied both development approaches (i.e., both the AB within-subjects
experiments and the crossover experiment), with the experiments where the
participants just applied one (i.e., the between-subjects experiments). Table
14 summarizes the results of the sub-group meta-analysis that we undertook.
Figure 7 shows the corresponding forest plot. Table 15 shows the estimated
quality scores of learning eﬀects divided by development approach.
T able 14 Sub-group meta-analysis: within vs. between.
Group N Estimate 95% CI I 2
Within 8 -7.66 (-18.36, 3.04) 78.22%
Between 4 -4.89 (-12.5, 2.71) 0%
Diﬀerence - -2.76 (-15.89, 10.36) -
T able 15 Marginal means for quality: learning eﬀects by treatment.
T reatment Group Estimate 95% CI
ITL Within 44.38 (32.08, 56.69)
Between 40.78 (24.34, 57.24)
TDD Within 36.54 (30.51, 42.58)
Between 35.98 (28.20, 43.75)
As we can see in Table 14, Figure 7, and Table 15, the sub-group formed
by the within-subjects experiments provides less optimistic results for TDD
(M = −7.66, 95% CI =(-18.36, 3.04)) than the sub-group formed by the
between-subjects experiments ( M = −4.86, 95% CI =(-12.5, 2.71)). However,
as the diﬀerence of results between both sub-groups is small (M = −2.76) and
TDD was applied in the second session in seven out of the eight within-subjects
experiments—and, thus, we would expect more optimistic results for TDD—
we hypothesize that learning eﬀects did not materialize . However, this needs
further study. Besides, whereas the sub-group of within-subjects experiments
still provides largely heterogeneous results, the sub-group of between-subjects
experiments provides homogeneous results. Again, this may be the result of
the low number of between-subjects experiments in our family, leading to low
I 2 statistic accuracy in this sub-group.
Key ﬁndings
The participants do not appear to have learned anything during the ﬁrst
session that boosted their performance in the second session.

--- PDF page 33 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 33
Fig. 8 Forest plot: order eﬀects.
−60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60
Effect Size
University 4
Company 4
Company 3
University 3
University 2
Company 2
Company 1
University 1
  3.22 [−20.62,  27.07]
−13.36 [−22.25,  −4.46]
 17.08 [−14.36,  48.51]
  5.64 [ −3.14,  14.42]
−28.61 [−38.03, −19.20]
 −3.34 [−20.25,  13.58]
−26.51 [−46.09,  −6.93]
 −0.80 [−17.76,  16.15]
 −7.70 [−18.37,   2.97]
AB within
−8.78 [−20.34, 2.77]
Cross−over
3.22 [−20.62, 27.07]
TDD<ITL TDD>ITLExperiment Effect Size [95% CI]
RE Model (Q = 39.38, p = 0.00; I2 = 67.6%)
RE Model subgroup (Q = 35.03, p = 0.00; I2 = 81.0%)
RE Model subgroup (Q = 0.00, p = 1.00; I2 = 0.0%)
6.4 Order of Treatment Application
In the discussion of the design of our experiments, we hypothesized that the
order of application of ITL and TDD may aﬀect the results. In particular, if
the participants applied ITL before TDD, the participants may learn some-
thing during the application of ITL (e.g., how to develop in small iterations)
that may potentially boost their performance later in the TDD session. In or-
der to check the extent to which this may have inﬂuenced the results, we ran
a crossover experiment (i.e., an experiment in which participants apply TDD
and ITL in a diﬀerent order) within our family. If the results of this experiment
turned out to be similar to the ﬁndings of the other within-subjects experi-
ments, then the order of application of TDD and ITL should not be aﬀecting
results. Table 16 summarizes the results of the sub-group meta-analysis that we
undertook to assess the inﬂuence of the order of application (i.e., AB within-
subjects experiment vs. crossover experiment) on results. Figure 8 shows the
corresponding forest plot. Table 17 shows the estimated quality scores of the
diﬀerent orders of application divided by development approach.
T able 16 Sub-group meta-analysis: AB Within vs. Crossover.
Group N Estimate 95% CI I 2
AB Within 7 -8.73 (-20.33, 2.86) 81.13%
Cross 1 3.22 (-20.62, 27.06) -
Diﬀerence - 11.96 (-14.55, 38.47) -
As we can see in Table 16, Figure 8, and Table 17, the results of the
crossover experiment ( M = 3 .22, 95% CI =(-20.62, 27.06)) are way more
optimistic than for the AB within-subjects experiments ( M = −8.73, 95%
CI =(-20.33, 2.86)). However, this result should be regarded with caution as
we conducted only one crossover experiment (i.e, University 4), and the re-
sults of two AB within-subjects experiments (i.e., University 3 and Company

--- PDF page 34 ---
34 Adrian Santos et al.
T able 17 Marginal means for quality: order of treatment.
T reatment Group Estimate 95% CI
ITL AB Within 45.54 (27.53, 63.54)
Crossover 38.20 (-7.87, 84.28)
TDD AB Within 36.27 (25.58, 46.96)
Crossover 41.42 (14.29, 68.55)
3, see the forest plot in Figure 5) were even more optimistic than the ﬁndings
of the crossover experiment. Finally, there is a large heterogeneity of results
in the sub-group of AB within-subjects experiments. This may be due to the
participation of professionals and students with diﬀerent levels of experience
across the experiments.
Key ﬁndings
The order of application of the development approaches may be aﬀecting
results. However, more crossover experiments are needed to assess this issue.
6.5 Discussion of Moderators at Experiment Level
We learned that the professionals achieved higher quality than the students
with both ITL and TDD in our family. This ﬁnding was at odds with the re-
sults of the self-assessment questionnaires that we handed out to participants,
where most students classed themselves as being at least as experienced as
professionals. This observation may be related to the Dunning-Kruger eﬀect
[32]. Other SE community members (e.g., [3,25]) have observed this eﬀect
before. In short, the Dunning-Kruger eﬀect suggests that the knowledge limi-
tations of the respondents—in this case students—may bias their perceptions
when rating their skills, which may lead to over-optimistic self-assessments. We
hypothesize that this may have led the students to rate themselves as more
experienced than professionals—despite their poorer performance with both
TDD and ITL. In view of the results in our family of experiments and of others
in the SE community [3,25], self-assessment questionnaires—contrary to what
Feigenspan et al. reported [17]—may, therefore, be unsuitable for describing
experience within heterogeneous populations. However, we put this forward as
a hypothesis and suggest that further studies be conducted to assess the extent
to which this hypothesis holds. Additionally, we call for further research aiming
to develop new measuring instruments for capturing participant experience in
SE empirical studies.
Although professionals achieved higher quality than students with both
ITL and TDD, the performance of professionals with TDD compared to ITL
dropped more than for students. This may suggest either that students learn
completely new development approaches—such as TDD—faster than profes-
sionals (and, thus, students manage to minimize their expected losses when
applying a completely new development approach) or that professionals have
higher opportunity costs—because they achieve higher quality scores with ITL

--- PDF page 35 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 35
than students—and, therefore, the drop in their performance when applying
TDD is greater than for students. Again, these ﬁndings are at odds with out-
comes published in the TDD literature, where professionals usually beneﬁt
most from TDD. We put this contradictory evidence in the literature down to
either the longer duration of the studies in which professionals participate—
who, as a result, have more time to get used to TDD—or the level at which
quality is measured in these studies (i.e., quality measured at team level at
the end of system development rather than for solo programmers). In any
case, our recommendation is to run longitudinal studies with students and pro-
fessionals to learn whether it is participant type —or other participant-related
characteristics like age—that are behind the diﬀerent learning rates (or oppor-
tunity costs) or experiments with TDD experts to learn whether, after enough
exposure, TDD signiﬁcantly outperforms control approaches.
We also learned that the programming environment aﬀected the perfor-
mance of both ITL and TDD similarly in our experiments—and thus, the
diﬀerence in performance between ITL and TDD was unaﬀected by the pro-
gramming environment. In other words, the diﬀerent programming environ-
ments did not aﬀect the results of the experiments that we ran. In view of
this, we recommend that the programming environments be adapted to the re-
quirements of the host institutions when conducting experiments . This should
increase the external validity of the results (as TDD will be evaluated in po-
tentially more diverse programming environments), and the internal validity
of the results (as participant unfamiliarity with the programming environment
used could interfere with their ability to apply the development approaches).
Three out of four experiments using the C programming environment led to
negative results in our family. This observation is at odds with the results typ-
ically achieved in case studies, where C environments are only associated with
positive results. These conﬂicting results may be due to the many variables on
which such case studies and our experiments diﬀer.
We ended by assessing the extent to which the learning eﬀects from one
session to another or the order of application of the development approaches
aﬀected the results of our experiments. We learned that the results of the ex-
periments were unaﬀected by whether the participants applied both ITL and
TDD or just one of the development approaches. In other words, no learning
eﬀects appeared to materialize in our experiments. In view of this, we recom-
mend that within-subjects instead of between-subjects experiments be run to
evaluate the performance of TDD . This increases both the external validity of
results (as more than one task needs to be exercised in within-subjects exper-
iments) and the precision of results (as the participants are assessed against
themselves, which reduces the variability of the results [14,18]). It also accom-
modates the above recommendation related to the eﬀects of the task being
developed on results. Finally, we noticed that the order of application of TDD
(i.e., in the ﬁrst session, or in the second session)may be aﬀecting results. How-
ever, as we only ran one crossover experiment within our family, and as two of
the AB within-subjects experiments provided even more extreme results than
the crossover experiment, we recommend that more crossover experiments be

--- PDF page 36 ---
36 Adrian Santos et al.
run to assess the extent to which the order of TDD application aﬀects the
results.
Finally, we found that there was still a large heterogeneity of results in al-
most all of the sub-groups that we analyzed (except the sub-group composed
exclusively of between-subjects experiments with students). This suggests ei-
ther that there are more experiment-level characteristics impacting the results
within each sub-group or that the diﬀerent participant characteristics across
the experiments are responsible for this heterogeneity of results. Unfortunately,
further sub-dividing the sub-groups according to other experiment-level char-
acteristics would aﬀect the reliability of the resulting estimates (as fewer ex-
periments would contribute towards the joint result in each sub-group [10]).
Thus, we think that the only option open to try to explain the heterogeneity
of results would be to study how participant characteristics impacted TDD
performance. However, as we changed the scales of the questionnaires in our
experiments—and our questionnaires may not have accurately captured the
diﬀerent participant experience either—we are unable to study this in our fam-
ily. We suggest that a family of experiments be run with improved instruments
for measuring this characteristic in the future .
7 RQ4: Participant-Level Moderators
Throughout this section, we answer RQ4: To what extent is quality aﬀected
by the participant characteristics: programming, programming language, unit
testing or testing tool experience? Note that another reason for conducting
families of experiments is to hypothesize on participant-level moderators that
may be inﬂuencing the results [47]. For this purpose, we assess the inﬂuence of
participant characteristics for professionals and students separately in Sections
7.1 and 7.2, respectively. Then, in Section 7.3, we discuss and contextualize
our ﬁndings.
7.1 Professional Characteristics
Tables 18 and 19 show the ANOVA p-values and marginal means for the inter-
action between treatment and each participant characteristic in Questionnaire
1 (37 participants) and Questionnaire 2 (17 participants). Figures 9 and 10
show the corresponding proﬁle plots. Note that downward-sloping lines in the
proﬁle plots indicate greater experience and lower quality for TDD with re-
spect to ITL (the opposite applies for upward-sloping lines).
The exploratory analyses of the data for professionals suggest that pro-
fessionals with more programming, programming languages, unit testing, and
testing tools experience perform worse with TDD compared to ITL. In order
words, the more experience professionals have, the larger the drop in quality
with TDD compared to ITL is. This holds in both questionnaires.

--- PDF page 37 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 37
T able 18 Treatment by participant experience interaction: Questionnaire 1 for profession-
als.
Characteristic Estimate 95% CI p-value
Treatment:Programming -5.08 (-21.55, 11.38) 0.53
Treatment:Prog. Language -0.47 (-16.82, 15.89) 0.95
Treatment:Unit Testing -8.01 (-29.22, 13.20) 0.45
Treatment:Testing Tool -6.56 (-55.70, 42.58) 0.79
T able 19 Treatment by participant experience interaction: Questionnaire 2 for profession-
als.
Characteristic Estimate 95% CI p-value
Treatment:Programming -14.07 (-39.73, 11.59) 0.26
Treatment:Prog. Language -15.32 (-30.27, -0.37) 0.05
Treatment:Unit Testing -23.26 (-44.81, -1.72) 0.04
Treatment:Testing Tool -39.18 (-61.83, -16.55) 0.00
Fig. 9 Proﬁle plot: mean diﬀerence in quality (TDD-ITL) for professionals per experience
level in Questionnaire 1.
−100
−50
0
50
100
1 2 3 4
Experience
QLTY
EXPERIENCE
Java
JUnit
Programming
Unit Testing
Fig. 10 Proﬁle plot: mean diﬀerence in quality (TDD-ITL) for professionals per experience
level in Questionnaire 2.
−100
−50
0
50
100
1 2 3 4
Experience
QLTY
EXPERIENCE
Java
JUnit
Programming
Unit Testing
Key ﬁndings
The more programming, programming languages, unit testing, and testing
tool experience professionals have, the worse they perform with TDD in
comparison to ITL.

--- PDF page 38 ---
38 Adrian Santos et al.
7.2 Student Characteristics
Tables 20 and 21 show the ANOVA p-values and marginal means for the inter-
action between treatment and each participant characteristic in Questionnaire
1 (73 participants) and Questionnaire 2 (261 participants). Figures 11 and 12
show the corresponding proﬁle plots.
T able 20 Treatment by participant experience interaction: Questionnaire 1 for students.
Characteristic Estimate 95% CI p-value
Treatment:Programming 9.27 (-12.49, 31.04) 0.39
Treatment:Prog. Language 17.53 (-3.22, 38.28) 0.10
Treatment:Unit Testing -12.59 (-44.52, 19.33) 0.43
Treatment:Testing Tool -12.11 (-46.61, 22.39) 0.48
T able 21 Treatment by participant experience interaction: Questionnaire 2 for students.
Characteristic Estimate 95% CI p-value
Treatment:Programming 3.32 (-5.83, 12.47) 0.47
Treatment:Prog. Language 3.84 (-5.77, 13.45) 0.43
Treatment:Unit Testing 1.12 (-10.01, 12.25) 0.84
Treatment:Testing Tool -1.34 (-13.33, 10.65) 0.82
Fig. 11 Proﬁle plot: mean diﬀerence in quality (TDD-ITL) for students per experience
level in Questionnaire 1.
−100
−50
0
50
100
1 2 3 4
Experience
QLTY
EXPERIENCE
Java
JUnit
Programming
Unit Testing
The exploratory analyses of students tell a diﬀerent story. In particular,
greater programming-related (programming and programming language) ex-
perience tends to beneﬁt TDD. This holds for both questionnaires.
Key ﬁndings
– More programming-related experience tends to beneﬁt TDD.
– More testing-related experience tends to beneﬁt ITL.

--- PDF page 39 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 39
Fig. 12 Proﬁle plot: mean diﬀerence in quality (TDD-ITL) for students per experience
level in Questionnaire 2.
−100
−50
0
50
100
1 2 3 4
Experience
QLTY
EXPERIENCE
Java
JUnit
Programming
Unit Testing
7.3 Discussion of Moderators at Participant Level
As for professionals, greater testing-related (unit testing and testing tool) ex-
perience tends to beneﬁt ITL. The results are similar for both questionnaires—
although more unit testing experience in Questionnaire 2 has a negligible posi-
tive eﬀect on TDD. We hypothesize that this may be because professionals may
be seasoned users of test-last approaches—more in line with waterfall model
development. Thus, they may ﬁnd it easier to continue with their usual devel-
opment habits and more diﬃcult to break with them and move towards new—
and perhaps less intuitive—test-ﬁrst development approaches (like TDD). It is
as if their previous programming habits lead to a higher resistance to change—
at least when applying the new approach in a single experimental session.
On the contrary, when the students apply TDD rather than ITL, quality
drops are comparatively smaller than for professionals. We hypothesize that
this may be because students with previous programming experience may be
more ﬂexible than professionals about learning completely new development
approaches (such as TDD). In fact, they may have not acquired such strong
development habits as professionals and, in this sense, may be less resistant
to change. In this regard, students with a lot of programming experience may
be beneﬁting from what [6] referred to as TDD’s virtuous cycles : creating a
test ﬁrst and then implementing a small functionality to pass that test may
increase developer focus and, possibly, performance. However, this is more
noticeable for students who have quite a lot more programming experience
than their peers.
We hypothesize that the negative inﬂuence of student testing experience on
TDD performance may be because students with more testing experience may
be more used to creating tests after seeing the implemented code. The reverse
development approach applied in TDD may, especially if students are short
on programming experience, impinge on their ability to implement new tests.
After all, designing a test for an as yet unimplemented functionality is likely
to slow down their progress if they do not have a clear idea of how it should
be implemented. This may help to explain why students with a lot of testing
experience beneﬁt more from use of ITL—as, with ITL, they implement the

--- PDF page 40 ---
40 Adrian Santos et al.
code ﬁrst, which facilitates test development (and matches their programming
approach).
Finally, students’ lower resistance to change—and, possibly, in view of
our observations, greater motivation or ﬂexibility to learn new development
approaches—may have led them to minimize their quality losses when applying
TDD over ITL with respect to professionals.
As these analyses are exploratory, we put forward these claims as mere
hypotheses. We note that the eﬀect of participant experience on the perfor-
mance diﬀerence between TDD and ITL tends to be larger with smaller sample
sizes for both students and professionals (i.e., with Questionnaire 1—attaching
years of experience to experience levels—for students, and with Questionnaire
2—not attaching years of experience to experience levels—for professionals).
This may be because there are inﬂuential points (i.e., points with abnormally
high X values—in our case, reported experience levels) that pull the regression
lines towards each other, especially if sample size is small [41]. In the case of
students, this may happen because regression lines are pooled towards the re-
sults of only a few participants declaring>10 years of experience. In the case of
professionals, this may happen because the regression lines are pooled towards
the results of only a few participants declaring large subjective experiences—as
we observed that most professionals tended to be conservative when reporting
their experience.
Finally, we ﬁnd that the inﬂuence of experience on results ﬂattens out
with larger sample sizes (as with Questionnaire 2 and students, where 261
participants were analyzed). This may suggest that either: (1) experience levels
inﬂuence the performance achieved with ITL or TDD similarly when results
are more accurate [14]; or (2) the self-assessment questionnaires that we used
did not capture participant experience—as when sample sizes get larger, the
inﬂuence of the experience on results ﬂattens out as random noise.
8 Threats to validity
8.1 Statistical Conclusion Validity
We relied upon parametric statistical tests (i.e., t-tests and linear mixed mod-
els [11,14,18]) to analyze the data of our family of experiments. We relied upon
the robustness of the t-test to departures from normality when analyzing the
data of our experiments [48,55,57]. To double-check, we have also analyzed the
data of the experiments with non-parametric tests (i.e., the Wilcoxon signed
rank test for within-subjects experiments, and the Wilcoxon rank sum test
for between-subjects experiments [18]), and computed the corresponding non-
parametric eﬀect sizes for each individual experiment (i.e., the point biserial
correlation following [44]), and their variances. Finally, we pooled the eﬀect
sizes—and their respective variances—using meta-analysis. The observed re-
sults are consistent with parametric test outcomes.

--- PDF page 41 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 41
We relied upon the central limit theorem to analyze the data of all the
experiments together with linear mixed models [34]. We ensured the robustness
of the results that we provided by meta-analyzing the data with both one-stage
and two-stage IPD models [43]. In the spirit of open-science and to ensure the
transparency of results, we uploaded the experimental data of the family and
the statistical analyses that we ran to a GitHub repository.
We acknowledge that the exploratory analyses made on participant expe-
rience may increase the risk of committing inﬂated type I error rates. To avoid
this problem, we focus more on the magnitude and sign of moderator eﬀects—
and their corresponding 95% CIs—than on their statistical signiﬁcance.
8.2 Internal Validity
We acknowledge that, as our experiments were designed merely to prove that
the development approach caused an eﬀect on quality (as we just randomized
participants to tasks and treatments), we are not able to draw any cause-eﬀect
relationships for the other variables that we investigated [33] (e.g., participant
type, programming environment, etc.). This is because diﬀerences across ex-
periment results could have been caused either by the variable under inves-
tigation (e.g., the participant type) or unacknowledged variables confounded
with the investigated variable (e.g., professionals were older than students,
and, thus, participant age could be the real cause behind the diﬀerences in the
results). Still, we think that these analyses may serve to foster further research
and as a proxy for understanding the heterogeneity of results reported in the
TDD literature.
We acknowledge that, as our experiments are embedded within training
courses (which meant that no participant had any previous experience), there
is a selection bias.
We acknowledge that the distinction between students and professionals is
controversial, and this could have an impact on our results (as some students
may also be working in industry, and some professionals may also be studying)
[16,50].
We acknowledge that diﬀerent test oracles may lead to diﬀerent results,
and therefore the chosen test oracle may be impacting results.
We also acknowledge that, although the IDEs and testing tools used with
C++ and C# are diﬀerent, we make the simpliﬁcation of considering them as
being a part of the same group of technologies in this study.
We acknowledge that the Hawthorne eﬀect 14 might have occurred. How-
ever, it would aﬀect TDD and ITL equally.
14 A type of reactivity in which individuals modify an aspect of their behavior in response
to their awareness of being observed.

--- PDF page 42 ---
42 Adrian Santos et al.
8.3 Construct Validity
We acknowledge that evaluating the source code with tests not written along-
side the code might inﬂuence results. However, this applies to both ITL and
TDD.
We acknowledge that, although we followed similar approaches to those
suggested in SE [16,17] for designing our experience questionnaires, the ques-
tionnaires may not be accurately capturing the participant characteristics.
We also acknowledge that the change of scales in some experiments did not
help during the meta-analysis phase. However, we provide testimony that self-
assessment questionnaires may be unsuitable for assessing the characteristics of
heterogeneous populations and also call for further research aiming to develop
new measurement instruments in order to evaluate participant characteristics
in joint analyses in the future. A possible solution could be to ask participants
about the number of programming courses they have taken, the number of
projects they have worked on, or how many years they have been working in
industry.
Notice that we do not check treatment conformance. Participants may have
applied a hybrid approach instead of ITL and TDD, which may have aﬀected
the construct validity of our studies. However, none of the empirical studies
on TDD check treatment conformance either.
Additionally, other issues, such as the average development cycle duration,
duration uniformity and refactoring eﬀort, rather than the code/test writing
order could pose a challenge [29].
Finally, we acknowledge that the hypothesis guessing threat might have
materialized [58]. People taking part in an experiment might try to ﬁgure out
what the purpose and intended result of the experiment is. They are then likely
to base their behavior on their guesses, acting either positively or negatively
depending on their attitude towards the anticipated hypothesis.
8.4 External Validity
Due to space restrictions, we focused on external quality only throughout this
article, omitting other quality attributes (e.g., internal quality, maintainabil-
ity, etc. [1]). We selected external quality as it is one of the attributes that—
according to its proponents [2,6]—TDD beneﬁts most. Also it is one of the
most studied attributes so far in the TDD literature [9,12,31,35,37,42,49],
thus allowing for further comparisons of results. Having said this, we acknowl-
edge that our ﬁndings are limited exclusively to external quality. Therefore,
our results may not be representative of what may happen with other quality
attributes.
As usual in SE experiments [58], we had to rely on toy tasks to evaluate the
performance of TDD and ITL. We relied on toy tasks similar to the ones used
in [P9],[15,20,52]. The downside of the use of toy tasks is a loss of realism,
where our results may not be representative of what may happen when devel-

--- PDF page 43 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 43
oping real industrial projects. Although this is a potential threat to external
validity (eﬀects might not be apparent on such small sized programs), it has
the advantages of increasing internal validity like:
– The possibility of observing task development within a controlled environ-
ment and thereby ensuring that external factors do not aﬀect the achieved
quality.
– The possibility of comparing the results achieved with both TDD and ITL
on an identical experimental task (since both TDD and ITL are applied
to code an identical experimental task, say, BSK). In turn, this helps to
ensure that diﬀerences across treatment results are not due to the diﬀerent
experimental tasks being developed with each treatment (as is the case if
both treatment and task go hand in hand—e.g. Waterfall Model-System 1
vs. TDD-System 2, as is typical in industrial case studies).
– The possibility of comparing the results from industrial experiments and
academic experiments—as if professionals had developed industrial tasks
and students, toy tasks, the diﬀerence in the results across experiments
could have been caused either by participant type (i.e., professionals vs.
students) or by the diﬀerent task types developed (either industrial tasks
or toy tasks).
Having said this, we acknowledge that our ﬁndings are limited exclusively
to toy tasks. Therefore, our ﬁndings may not be representative of what may
happen when developing real-life industrial systems. However, we expect our
results to be representative for professionals and students who are starting to
learn the TDD process when developing toy tasks.
We discarded the data for three tasks (i.e., MP, SDK and SS) when study-
ing the eﬀect of task on results. We did this because each task was used in at
most two experiments, and we did not have enough data to provide accurate
results. We acknowledge that this decision may have limited the external va-
lidity of our ﬁndings with regard to the eﬀect of the task on results. However,
considering that MR and BSK inﬂuence both ITL and TDD similarly, we see
no reason why MP, SDK or SS should behave diﬀerently. Still, this deserves
further study.
We acknowledge that, as our experiments are embedded within training
courses and participants are novices and not experienced people, the general-
ization of results is limited to TDD novices only.
9 Conclusions
Most of the studies published so far on TDD claim that TDD outperforms
control approaches with regard to external quality [9,12,31,35,37,42,49]. How-
ever, the extent to which TDD outperforms control approaches seems largely
dependent upon a myriad of yet to be discovered variables [40]. The disaggre-
gation of the results of the TDD studies published so far according to their re-
search methods (i.e., case studies, surveys, experiments), participant type (i.e.,

--- PDF page 44 ---
44 Adrian Santos et al.
professionals vs. students), task type (toy task vs. industrial project), unit of
analysis (i.e., solo programmers, pair programmers, or teams), project length
(i.e., days, weeks, months or years), and programming environment (i.e., Java
vs. C/C++/C# technologies) could provide further insight. In particular, we
found that, while the most optimistic results for TDD tend to be achieved in
case studies conducted over months or years with development teams coding
industry-relevant systems, the results achieved in the studies where TDD is
evaluated either on solo or pair programmers for toy tasks tend to be more
conservative. We put this down to the shorter time frame in which experiments
are run compared to case studies. In particular, TDD may not ”click”, and
improve external quality, until after a fairly long exposure time. The many
changes made across the studies complicate the aggregation of results, and
the identiﬁcation of the variables that are impacting the results.
We adopted a diﬀerent approach to provide joint results and identify vari-
ables impacting results: we conducted a family of experiments composed of
four industrial experiments and eight academic experiments. We used identi-
cal tasks and response variable operationalizations across all the experiments.
We adapted the experimental conﬁgurations to the restrictions of our indus-
trial partners. We evaluated the extent to which the shortcomings of these
experimental conﬁgurations impacted the results by altering the conﬁgura-
tions of the academic experiments that we ran and comparing their results.
We provided joint results and assessed the potential eﬀects of the experimental
changes using meta-analysis [10].
With our family, we learned that TDD novices seem to perform slightly
better using iterative test-last development (i.e., ITL, the reverse approach of
TDD according to Erdogmus et al. [P9]) than with TDD in terms of quality.
We also learned that the task under development consistently aﬀects—either
increasing or decreasing—the quality scores achieved with both TDD and ITL
for TDD novices. Finally, we reached the conclusion that there is no ’wonder’
task that boosts quality with a particular development approach: whatever
aﬀects TDD, also aﬀects ITL, and vice versa.
Then we learned that although professionals achieve higher quality than
students with ITL and TDD, their performance with TDD dropped more than
for students. We hypothesize that this may be because either professionals and
students have diﬀerent learning rates or professionals have higher opportunity
costs when applying TDD. However, further experiments are needed before we
can make deﬁnite claims regarding this issue—as the diﬀerence in performance
between TDD and ITL for professionals and students was not statistically sig-
niﬁcant. Additionally, we learned that self-assessment questionnaires may not
be informative for describing the characteristics of heterogeneous populations:
the students in our family seemed to be overrating their expertise because they
were not suﬃciently knowledgeable. Neither the programming environment,
nor the learning eﬀects from one development approach to another inﬂuenced
the results of our experiments. The order of application of TDD (i.e., before or
after ITL) may be aﬀecting the results. However, more experiments are needed
to assess the extent to which this holds.

--- PDF page 45 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 45
In view of our ﬁndings, we acknowledge that the diﬀerences in results ob-
served between case studies and surveys, on the one hand, and experiments,
on the other (i.e., positive vs. negative, respectively), may be inﬂuenced by the
fact that experiment participants were not previously familiar with the TDD
process. Consequently, we call for experiments with TDD experts to be run in
order to eventually be able to ascertain whether the optimistic results achieved
in case studies with TDD are also reproduced in experimental settings. Based
on our ﬁndings, we also recommend adapting the programming environments
of the experiments to host institution demands, using as few tasks as necessary
to evaluate the performance of TDD and the control approach, favoring the
execution of within-subjects over between-subjects experiments to assess the
performance of TDD, designing new measuring instruments to measure partic-
ipant experience, and running further studies to study the eﬀect of participant
characteristics on results.
Throughout this article, we argue that, while most empirical studies show
that TDD outperforms control approaches (e.g., ITL or waterfall model), the
extent of this outperformance appears to be dependent upon a great many
variables. In addition, despite the many years of TDD research, little is yet
known about how TDD performs in industrial experiments [40]. In view of this
and the results of our family of experiments, we conclude:
– As the results of the experiments in which the participants applied both
ITL and TDD and others in which they applied just one approach were
similar, we recommend running within-subjects experiments instead of
between-subjects experiments to increase the precision of results.
– As the programming environment does not appear to inﬂuence the results
of the experiments, we hypothesize that diﬀerences across study results
in the literature are unlikely to be caused by the diﬀerent programming
environments.
– The task under development seems to have a similar inﬂuence—either in-
creasing or decreasing—on quality with both ITL and TDD. Thus, as long
as the same task is developed with TDD and the control approach in a
study, diﬀerences across study results are unlikely to be caused by the dif-
ferent tasks being developed. However, as quality seems largely dependent
upon the task being developed, we recommend either: (1) the use of only
one task in between-subjects experiments so as not to increase the variabil-
ity of the data and, thus, lower the precision of results; or (2) the execution
of within-subjects experiments so as to cancel out the extra variability po-
tentially introduced by diﬀerent tasks.
– As a range of variables—diﬀerent study durations, experiment partici-
pant unfamiliarity with TDD, the control approach (e.g., waterfall model)
used for the performance comparison with TDD in case studies, or sys-
tem complexity—may be behind the conﬂicting results of case studies and
surveys, on the one hand, and experiments, on the other (i.e., positive vs.
negative, respectively), more experiments investigating these variables are
needed to assess these hypotheses.

--- PDF page 46 ---
46 Adrian Santos et al.
Finally, we have made the experimental data generated by the participants
in our family (i.e., their Java and Visual Studio solutions), their raw data (i.e.,
their external quality scores, treatment to task assignments and experience-
level variables) and the R code that led to the results reported throughout
this study available in a GitHub repository. Hopefully, this could be used by
other SE researchers to run their own studies and round out our conclusions.
Acknowledgements This research was developed with the support of project PGC2018-
097265-B-I00, funded by: FEDER/Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation—Research
State Agency. We would like to thank the participants in the ESEIL experiments: this
research would not have been possible without your help. We would also like to thank the
anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments during the review of the manuscript.
References
1. ISO/IEC 25010:2011 (2011). URL https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/{#}iso:std:iso-iec:
25010:ed-1:v1:en
2. Astels, D.: Test driven development: A practical guide. Prentice Hall Professional Tech-
nical Reference (2003)
3. Baltes, S., Diehl, S.: Towards a theory of software development expertise. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.06087 (2018)
4. Basili, V.R.: Software modeling and measurement: the goal/question/metric paradigm.
Tech. rep. (1992)
5. Basili, V.R., Shull, F., Lanubile, F.: Building knowledge through families of experiments.
Software Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 25(4), 456–473 (1999)
6. Beck, K.: Test-driven development: by example. Addison-Wesley Professional (2003)
7. Bergersen, G., Sjoberg, D., Dyba, T.: Construction and validation of an instrument for
measuring programming skill. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 40(12), 1163–
1184 (2014)
8. Bertolino, A.: Software testing research: Achievements, challenges, dreams. In: 2007
Future of Software Engineering, pp. 85–103. IEEE Computer Society (2007)
9. Bissi, W., Neto, A.G.S.S., Emer, M.C.F.P.: The eﬀects of test driven development on
internal quality, external quality and productivity: A systematic review. Information
and Software Technology 74, 45–54 (2016)
10. Borenstein, M., Hedges, L.V., Higgins, J.P., Rothstein, H.R.: Introduction to Meta-
Analysis. John Wiley & Sons (2011)
11. Brown, H., Prescott, R.: Applied mixed models in medicine. John Wiley & Sons (2014)
12. Causevic, A., Sundmark, D., Punnekkat, S.: Factors limiting industrial adoption of
test driven development: A systematic review. In: Software Testing, Veriﬁcation and
Validation (ICST), 2011 IEEE Fourth International Conference on, pp. 337–346. IEEE
(2011)
13. Cooper, H., Patall, E.A.: The relative beneﬁts of meta-analysis conducted with individ-
ual participant data versus aggregated data. Psychological methods 14(2), 165 (2009)
14. Cumming, G.: Understanding the new statistics: Eﬀect sizes, conﬁdence intervals, and
meta-analysis. Routledge (2013)
15. Dieste, O., Aranda, A.M., Uyaguari, F., Turhan, B., Tosun, A., Fucci, D., Oivo, M.,
Juristo, N.: Empirical evaluation of the eﬀects of experience on code quality and pro-
grammer productivity: an exploratory study. Empirical Software Engineering 22(5),
2457–2542 (2017)
16. Falessi, D., Juristo, N., Wohlin, C., Turhan, B., M¨ unch, J., Jedlitschka, A., Oivo, M.:
Empirical software engineering experts on the use of students and professionals in exper-
iments. Empirical Software Engineering 23(1), 452–489 (2018)
17. Feigenspan, J., K¨ astner, C., Liebig, J., Apel, S., Hanenberg, S.: Measuring program-
ming experience. In: Program Comprehension (ICPC), 2012 IEEE 20th International
Conference on, pp. 73–82. IEEE (2012)

--- PDF page 47 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 47
18. Field, A.: Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics. Sage (2013)
19. Fisher, D., Copas, A., Tierney, J., Parmar, M.: A critical review of methods for the
assessment of patient-level interactions in individual participant data meta-analysis of
randomized trials, and guidance for practitioners. Journal of clinical epidemiology 64(9),
949–967 (2011)
20. Fucci, D., Erdogmus, H., Turhan, B., Oivo, M., Juristo, N.: A dissection of the test-
driven development process: does it really matter to test-ﬁrst or to test-last? IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering 43(7), 597–614 (2017)
21. G´ omez, O.S., Juristo, N., Vegas, S.: Understanding replication of experiments in soft-
ware engineering: A classiﬁcation. Information and Software Technology 56(8), 1033–
1048 (2014)
22. Gurevitch, J., Koricheva, J., Nakagawa, S., Stewart, G.: Meta-analysis and the science
of research synthesis. Nature 555(7695), 175 (2018)
23. Higgins, J.P., Green, S., et al.: Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interven-
tions, vol. 5. Wiley Online Library (2008)
24. Jia, Y., Harman, M.: An analysis and survey of the development of mutation testing.
IEEE transactions on software engineering 37(5), 649–678 (2011)
25. Jung, J., Hoeﬁg, K., Domis, D., Jedlitschka, A., Hiller, M.: Experimental comparison of
two safety analysis methods and its replication. In: Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement, 2013 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on, pp. 223–232. IEEE (2013)
26. Juristo, N., Moreno, A.M.: Basics of software engineering experimentation. Springer
Science & Business Media (2001)
27. Juristo, N., Vegas, S.: Using diﬀerences among replications of software engineering ex-
periments to gain knowledge. In: Proceedings of the 2009 3rd International Symposium
on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement, pp. 356–366. IEEE Computer So-
ciety (2009)
28. Karac, E.I., Turhan, B., Juristo, N.: A controlled experiment with novice developers on
the impact of task description granularity on software quality in test-driven development.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2019)
29. Karac, I., Turhan, B.: What do we (really) know about test-driven development? IEEE
Software 35(4), 81–85 (2018)
30. Kitchenham, B.: The role of replications in empirical software engineering, a word of
warning. Empirical Software Engineering 13(2), 219–221 (2008)
31. Kollanus, S.: Test-driven development-still a promising approach? In: Quality of Infor-
mation and Communications Technology (QUATIC), 2010 Seventh International Con-
ference on the, pp. 403–408. IEEE (2010)
32. Kruger, J., Dunning, D.: Unskilled and unaware of it: how diﬃculties in recognizing
one’s own incompetence lead to inﬂated self-assessments. Journal of personality and
social psychology 77(6), 1121 (1999)
33. Lau, J., Ioannidis, J.P., Schmid, C.H.: Summing up evidence: one answer is not always
enough. The lancet 351(9096), 123–127 (1998)
34. Lumley, T., Diehr, P., Emerson, S., Chen, L.: The importance of the normality assump-
tion in large public health data sets. Annual review of public health 23(1), 151–169
(2002)
35. M¨ akinen, S., M¨ unch, J.: Eﬀects of test-driven development: A comparative analysis of
empirical studies. In: International Conference on Software Quality, pp. 155–169. Springer
(2014)
36. Martin, C.: Advanced Principles, Patterns and Process of Software Development. Pren-
tice Hall (2001)
37. Munir, H., Moayyed, M., Petersen, K.: Considering rigor and relevance when evaluating
test driven development: A systematic review. Information and Software Technology
56(4), 375–394 (2014)
38. Myers, G.J., Sandler, C., Badgett, T.: The art of software testing. John Wiley & Sons
(2011)
39. Norman, G.: Likert scales, levels of measurement and the “laws” of statistics. Advances
in health sciences education 15(5), 625–632 (2010)
40. Oﬀutt, J.: Why don’t we publish more TDD research papers? Software Testing, Veriﬁ-
cation and Reliability 28(4), e1670 (2018)

--- PDF page 48 ---
48 Adrian Santos et al.
41. Quinn, G.P., Keough, M.J.: Experimental design and data analysis for biologists. Cam-
bridge University Press (2002)
42. Raﬁque, Y., Miˇ si´ c, V.B.: The eﬀects of test-driven development on external quality
and productivity: A meta-analysis. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 39(6),
835–856 (2013)
43. Riley, R.D., Lambert, P.C., Abo-Zaid, G.: Meta-analysis of individual participant data:
rationale, conduct, and reporting. Bmj 340, c221 (2010)
44. Rosenthal, R.: Meta-analytic Procedures for Social Research, vol. 6. Sage (1991)
45. Santos, A., Gomez, O.S., Juristo, N.: Analyzing families of experiments in SE: a sys-
tematic mapping study. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering p. 1. DOI 10.1109/
TSE.2018.2864633. URL doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/TSE.2018.2864633
46. Santos, A., Jarvinen, J., Partanen, J., Oivo, M., Juristo, N.: Does the performance of
tdd hold across software companies and premises? a group of industrial experiments on
tdd. In: International Conference on Product-Focused Software Process Improvement,
pp. 227–242. Springer (2018)
47. Santos, A., Vegas, S., Oivo, M., Juristo, N.: Guidelines for analyzing families of experi-
ments in SE. Submitted to IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
48. Schmider, E., Ziegler, M., Danay, E., Beyer, L., B¨ uhner, M.: Is it really robust? Method-
ology (2010)
49. Shull, F., Melnik, G., Turhan, B., Layman, L., Diep, M., Erdogmus, H.: What do we
know about test-driven development? IEEE software 27(6), 16–19 (2010)
50. Sjøberg, D.I., Bergersen, G.R.: The price of using students comments on empirical
software engineering experts on the use of students and professionals in experiments.
CoRR abs/1810.10791 (2018). URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.10791
51. Thorlund, K., Imberger, G., Johnston, B.C., Walsh, M., Awad, T., Thabane, L., Gluud,
C., Devereaux, P., Wetterslev, J.: Evolution of heterogeneity (i2) estimates and their 95%
conﬁdence intervals in large meta-analyses. PloS one 7(7), e39471 (2012)
52. Tosun, A., Dieste, O., Fucci, D., Vegas, S., Turhan, B., Erdogmus, H., Santos, A., Oivo,
M., Toro, K., Jarvinen, J., et al.: An industry experiment on the eﬀects of test-driven
development on external quality and productivity. Empirical Software Engineering22(6),
2763–2805 (2017)
53. Tosun, A., Dieste, O., Vegas, S., Pfahl, D., Rungi, K., Juristo, N.: Investigating the
impact of development task on external quality in test-driven development: An industry
experiment. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (In press)
54. Vegas, S., Dieste, ´O., Juristo, N.: Diﬃculties in running experiments in the software in-
dustry: experiences from the trenches. In: Proceedings of the Third International Work-
shop on Conducting Empirical Studies in Industry at ICSE, pp. 3–9. IEEE Press (2015)
55. Vickers, A.J.: Parametric versus non-parametric statistics in the analysis of randomized
trials with non-normally distributed data. BMC medical research methodology 5(1), 35
(2005)
56. Williams, L., Kessler, R.: Pair programming illuminated. Addison-Wesley Longman
Publishing Co., Inc. (2002)
57. de Winter, J.: Using the student’s t-test with extremely small sample sizes. Practical
Assessment, Research & Evaluation 18(10) (2013). [Online; accessed 28-August-2018]
58. Wohlin, C., Runeson, P., H¨ ost, M., Ohlsson, M.C., Regnell, B., Wessl´ en, A.: Experi-
mentation in software engineering. Springer Science & Business Media (2012)
Appendix A
Primary Studies
[P1] Aniche, M.F., Gerosa, M.A.: Most common mistakes in test-driven development prac-
tice: Results from an online survey with developers. In: Software Testing, Veriﬁcation,
and Validation Workshops (ICSTW), 2010 Third International Conference on, pp.
469–478. IEEE (2010)

--- PDF page 49 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 49
[P2] Bannerman, S., Martin, A.: A multiple comparative study of test-with development
product changes and their eﬀects on team speed and product quality. Empirical
Software Engineering 16(2), 177–210 (2011)
[P3] Bhat, T., Nagappan, N.: Evaluating the eﬃcacy of test-driven development: industrial
case studies. In: Proceedings of the 2006 ACM/IEEE international symposium on
Empirical software engineering, pp. 356–363. ACM (2006)
[P4] Damm, L.O., Lundberg, L.: Quality impact of introducing component-level test au-
tomation and test-driven development. In: European Conference on Software Process
Improvement, pp. 187–199. Springer (2007)
[P5] Desai, C., Janzen, D.S., Clements, J.: Implications of integrating test-driven develop-
ment into cs1/cs2 curricula. In: ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, vol. 41, pp. 148–152. ACM
(2009)
[P6] Dogˇ sa, T., Batiˇ c, D.: The eﬀectiveness of test-driven development: an industrial case
study. Software Quality Journal 19(4), 643–661 (2011)
[P7] Domino, M.A., Collins, R.W., Hevner, A.R.: Controlled experimentation on adapta-
tions of pair programming. Information Technology and Management 8(4), 297–312
(2007)
[P8] Edwards, S.H.: Using test-driven development in the classroom: Providing students
with automatic, concrete feedback on performance. In: Proceedings of the interna-
tional conference on education and information systems: technologies and applications
EISTA, vol. 3. Citeseer (2003)
[P9] Erdogmus, H., Morisio, M., Torchiano, M.: On the eﬀectiveness of the test-ﬁrst ap-
proach to programming. IEEE Transactions on software Engineering 31(3), 226–237
(2005)
[P10] George, B., Williams, L.: A structured experiment of test-driven development. Infor-
mation and software Technology 46(5), 337–342 (2004)
[P11] George, B., et al.: Analysis and quantiﬁcation of test driven development approach
(2002)
[P12] Geras, A., Smith, M., Miller, J.: A prototype empirical evaluation of test driven
development. In: Software Metrics, 2004. Proceedings. 10th International Symposium
on, pp. 405–416. IEEE (2004)
[P13] Gupta, A., Jalote, P.: An experimental evaluation of the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of
the test driven development. In: First International Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement (ESEM 2007), pp. 285–294. IEEE (2007)
[P14] Huang, L., Holcombe, M.: Empirical investigation towards the eﬀectiveness of test
ﬁrst programming. Information and Software Technology 51(1), 182–194 (2009)
[P15] Kobayashi, O., Kawabata, M., Sakai, M., Parkinson, E.: Analysis of the interaction
between practices for introducing xp eﬀectively. In: Proceedings of the 28th interna-
tional conference on Software engineering, pp. 544–550. ACM (2006)
[P16] LeJeune, N.F.: Teaching software engineering practices with extreme programming.
Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges 21(3), 107–117 (2006)
[P17] Lui, K.M., Chan, K.C.: Test driven development and software process improvement
in china. In: International Conference on Extreme Programming and Agile Processes
in Software Engineering, pp. 219–222. Springer (2004)
[P18] Madeyski, L., Sza la,  L.: The impact of test-driven development on software develop-
ment productivity—an empirical study. In: European Conference on Software Process
Improvement, pp. 200–211. Springer (2007)
[P19] Marchenko, A., Abrahamsson, P., Ihme, T.: Long-term eﬀects of test-driven devel-
opment a case study. In: International Conference on Agile Processes and Extreme
Programming in Software Engineering, pp. 13–22. Springer (2009)
[P20] Maximilien, E.M., Williams, L.: Assessing test-driven development at ibm. In: Soft-
ware Engineering, 2003. Proceedings. 25th International Conference on, pp. 564–569.
IEEE (2003)
[P21] McDaid, K., Rust, A., Bishop, B.: Test-driven development: can it work for spread-
sheets? In: Proceedings of the 4th international workshop on End-user software en-
gineering, pp. 25–29. ACM (2008)
[P22] Mueller, M.M., Hagner, O.: Experiment about test-ﬁrst programming. IEE
Proceedings-Software 149(5), 131–136 (2002)

--- PDF page 50 ---
50 Adrian Santos et al.
[P23] Nagappan, N., Maximilien, E.M., Bhat, T., Williams, L.: Realizing quality improve-
ment through test driven development: results and experiences of four industrial
teams. Empirical Software Engineering 13(3), 289–302 (2008)
[P24] Panˇ cur, M., Ciglariˇ c, M.: Impact of test-driven development on productivity, code and
tests: A controlled experiment. Information and Software Technology 53(6), 557–573
(2011)
[P25] Pancur, M., Ciglaric, M., Trampus, M., Vidmar, T.: Towards empirical evaluation of
test-driven development in a university environment. In: EUROCON 2003. Computer
as a Tool. The IEEE Region 8, vol. 2, pp. 83–86. IEEE (2003)
[P26] Paula Filho, W.P.: Quality gates in use-case driven development. In: Proceedings of
the 2006 international workshop on Software quality, pp. 33–38. ACM (2006)
[P27] Rahman, S.M.: Applying the tbc method in introductory programming courses. In:
Frontiers In Education Conference-Global Engineering: Knowledge Without Borders,
Opportunities Without Passports, 2007. FIE’07. 37th Annual, pp. T1E–20. IEEE
(2007)
[P28] Sanchez, J.C., Williams, L., Maximilien, E.M.: On the sustained use of a test-driven
development practice at ibm. In: Agile Conference (AGILE), 2007, pp. 5–14. IEEE
(2007)
[P29] Siniaalto, M., Abrahamsson, P.: Does test-driven development improve the program
code? alarming results from a comparative case study. In: Balancing Agility and
Formalism in Software Engineering, pp. 143–156. Springer (2008)
[P30] Slyngstad, O.P.N., Li, J., Conradi, R., Rønneberg, H., Landre, E., Wesenberg, H.:
The impact of test driven development on the evolution of a reusable framework
of components–an industrial case study. In: Software Engineering Advances, 2008.
ICSEA’08. The Third International Conference on, pp. 214–223. IEEE (2008)
[P31] Vu, J.H., Frojd, N., Shenkel-Therolf, C., Janzen, D.S.: Evaluating test-driven de-
velopment in an industry-sponsored capstone project. In: Proceedings of the Sixth
International Conference on Information Technology: New Generations, p. 229 (2009)
[P32] Wilkerson, J.W., Nunamaker Jr, J.F., Mercer, R.: Comparing the defect reduction
beneﬁts of code inspection and test-driven development. IEEE Transactions on Soft-
ware Engineering 38(3), 547 (2012)
[P33] Xu, S., Li, T.: Evaluation of test-driven development: An academic case study. In:
Software Engineering Research, Management and Applications 2009, pp. 229–238.
Springer (2009)
[P34] Yenduri, S., Perkins, A.L.: Impact of using test-driven development: A case study.
Software Engineering Research and Practice 1(2006), 126–129 (2006)
[P35] Ynchausti, R.A.: Integrating unit testing into a software development team’s process.
XP 1, 84–87 (2001)
[P36] Zielinski, K., Szmuc, T.: Preliminary analysis of the eﬀects of pair programming
and test-driven development on the external code quality. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Applications p. 113 (2005)

--- PDF page 51 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 51
Adrian Santos received his MSc in Software and Sys-
tems and MSc in Software Project Management at the
Technical University of Madrid, Spain, and his MSc
in IT Auditing, Security and Government at the Au-
tonomous University of Madrid, Spain. He obtained his
PhD in Software Engineering at the University of Oulu,
Finland. He is currently working as a software engineer
in industry.
Sira Vegas has been associate professor of software en-
gineering with the School of Computer Engineering at
the Technical University of Madrid, Spain, since 2008.
Sira belongs to the review board of IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, and is a regular reviewer of
the Empirical Software Engineering Journal. She was
program chair for the International Symposium on Em-
pirical Software Engineering and Measurement in 2007.
´Oscar Dieste received a degree in Computing
from the University of La Coru˜ na and his PhD
from the University of Castilla-La Mancha. He is
a researcher with the UPM’s School of Computer
Engineering. He was previously with the Univer-
sity of Colorado at Colorado Springs (as a Ful-
bright scholar), the Complutense University of Madrid,
and the Alfonso X el Sabio University. His research interests include empirical
software engineering and requirements engineering.
Fernando Uyaguari received his MSc in Software
Engineering, and PhD from Technical University of Madrid.
His research interests include empirical software engi-
neering and agile development methodologies, in par-
ticular test driven development.

--- PDF page 52 ---
52 Adrian Santos et al.
Ayse Tosun is an assistant professor at the Faculty of
Computer and Informatics Engineering, Istanbul Tech-
nical University, Turkey. Prior to joining ITU, she worked
as a post-doctoral research fellow at University of Oulu,
Finland. She received her PhD in 2012, and MSc degree
in 2008 from Department of Computer Engineering,
Bogazici University, Turkey. Her research interests are
empirical software engineering, more speciﬁcally mining software data reposi-
tories, software quality, measurement, process improvement, and applications
of AI on building recommendation systems for software engineering.
Davide Fucci is an Assistant Professor (tenure-track)
in Software Engineering at the Blekinge Institute of
Technology. His focus is on Empirical Software Engi-
neering, Requirements Engineering, and Humas Aspects.
During his Ph.D., Davide worked together with indus-
try to evaluate and improve Agile software development
methodologies, such as unit testing and test-driven de-
velopment. Thereafter, he worked in the area of data-
driven Requirements Engineering at the University of
Hamburg. Davide regularly publishes in software engi-
neering venues and occupies several positions in venues
related to empirical software and requirements engineering communities. He
is a member of the ACM and the IEEE Computer societies.
Burak Turhan, PhD (Bo˘ gazi¸ ci University), is a Pro-
fessor in the Faculty of Electrical Engineering and In-
formation Technology at the University of Oulu and an
Adjunct Professor in the Faculty of Information Tech-
nology at Monash University. His research focuses on
empirical software engineering, software analytics, qual-
ity assurance and testing, human factors, and (agile)
development processes. He is a Senior Associate Editor
of Journal of Systems and Software, an Editorial Board
Member of Empirical Software Engineering, Informa-
tion and Software Technology, and Software Quality Journal, a Review Board
member of IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, a Senior Member of
the ACM and IEEE, and a member of ACM SIGSOFT and IEEE Computer
Society. For more information please visit: https://turhanb.net or contact him
at turhanb@computer.org.

--- PDF page 53 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 53
Giuseppe Scanniello received his Laurea andPh.D.
degrees, both in Computer Science, from the University
of Salerno, Italy, in 2001 and 2003, respectively. In 2006,
he joined, as an AssistantProfessor, the Department of
Mathematics andComputer Science at the University of
Basilicata, Potenza, Italy. In 2015, he became an Asso-
ciateProfessor at the same university. He has published
more than 170 referred papers in journals, books, and
conference proceedings. He serves on the organising of
major international conferences and workshops in the
ﬁeld of software engineering. GiuseppeScanniello leads
both the group and the laboratory of software engineering at the University
of Basilicata (BASELab).
Simone Romano received the Ph.D. in Computer Sci-
ence and Mathematics from the University of Salento
(in collaboration with the University of Basilicata), Italy,
in July 2018 under the supervision of prof. Giuseppe
Scanniello. In September 2018, he joined the Depart-
ment of Computer Science at the University of Bari as
a postdoctoral research fellow. He has served in the or-
ganization and has been a program committee member
of several international conferences/workshops. His research interests include:
test-driven development, software refactoring, software testing, software main-
tenance, empirical software engineering, and human factors in software engi-
neering
Itir Karac is a Ph.D. candidate and a researcher in the
Empirical Software Engineering (M3S) research unit at
the University of Oulu, Finland. She received her B.Sc.
degree in Mathematics and her M.Sc. degree in Com-
puter Engineering from Bo˘ gazi¸ ci University, Turkey. Her
research interests include empirical software engineer-
ing and software analytics. She is a member of IEEE.

--- PDF page 54 ---
54 Adrian Santos et al.
Vladimir Mandi´ cis an assistant professor of SE at
University of Novi Sad, Serbia. He received his PhD
degree in Information Processing Science and SE from
the University of Oulu, Finland, and M.Sc.E.E from the
University of Novi Sad, Serbia. His areas of interest are
software process improvement, empirical software engi-
neering, goal-driven measurement approaches, techni-
cal debt and value-based software engineering. He is a
member of the IEEE Computer Society.
Robert Ramaˇ cis a teaching assistant of Software En-
gineering at the University of Novi Sad, Serbia, and a
software developer at TIAC ltd. Currently he is enrolled
as a PhD student at the University of Novi Sad, at the
Faculty of Technical Sciences. He received two M.Sc.
degrees at the University of Novi Sad, master of Infor-
mation technologies and master of Engineering man-
agement. His areas of interest are: empirical software
engineering, software development, technical debt, the
improvement of the software development process.
Dietmar Pfahl is Professor of Software Engineering at
the University of Tartu, Estonia, and Adjunct Professor
with the Schulich School of Engineering at the Univer-
sity of Calgary, Canada. He earned his PhD from TU
Kaiserslautern, Germany in 2001. His research interests
focus on data-driven decision support in software engi-
neering and management. He has 140+ peer reviewed
publications in top-ranked software engineering jour-
nals and conference proceedings. He is a senior member
of both IEEE and ACM.
Kerli Rungi is Head of Learning and Growth at Testlio
OY, Estonia. Prior to this, she worked at Playtech Es-
tonia. Kerli has an MSc degree in Software Engineering
from the University of Tartu, Estonia.

--- PDF page 55 ---
A Family of Experiments on Test-Driven Development 55
Carolina Palomeque is a systems engineer with a MS
in IT Strategic Manager from Universidad de Cuenca,
Ecuador. She has been working in the utilities industry
for several years now in roles such as software engineer
and project management. Her areas of interest include
agile methodologies and empirical software engineering
frameworks.
Markku Oivo is professor and head of the M3S re-
search unit at the University of Oulu, Finland. He had
visiting positions at the University of Maryland (1990-
91), Schlumberger Ltd. (Paris 1994-95), Fraunhofer IESE
(1999-2000), University of Bolzano (2014-15), and Uni-
versidad Polit´ ecnica de Madrid (2015).
Natalia Juristo has been full professor of software en-
gineering with the School of Computer Engineering at
the Technical University of Madrid, Spain, since 1997.
She was awarded a FiDiPro (Finland Distinguished Pro-
fessor Program) professorship at the University of Oulu,
from January 2013 until June 2018. Natalia belongs to
the editorial board of EMSE and STVR. In 2009, Na-
talia was awarded an honorary doctorate by Blekinge
Institute of Technology in Sweden.