
===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
LLM4TDD: Best Practices for Test Driven Development Using
Large Language Models
Sanyogita Piya
The University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, TX, USA
sanyogita.piya@mavs.uta.edu
Allison Sullivan
The University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, TX, USA
allison.sullivan@uta.edu
ABSTRACT
In today’s society, we are becoming increasingly dependent on soft-
ware systems. However, we also constantly witness the negative
impacts of buggy software. Program synthesis aims to improve soft-
ware correctness by automatically generating the program given an
outline of the expected behavior. For decades, program synthesis
has been an active research field, with recent approaches looking
to incorporate Large Language Models to help generate code. This
paper explores the concept of LLM4TDD, where we guide Large
Language Models to generate code iteratively using a test-driven
development methodology. We conduct an empirical evaluation
using ChatGPT and coding problems from LeetCode to investigate
the impact of different test, prompt and problem attributes on the
efficacy of LLM4TDD.
ACM Reference Format:
Sanyogita Piya and Allison Sullivan. 2023. LLM4TDD: Best Practices for
Test Driven Development Using Large Language Models. In Proceedings
of ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 8 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION
Our lives are increasingly dependent on software systems. However,
these same systems, even safety-critical ones, are notoriously buggy.
While there are a plethora of software testing and verification
techniques, software failures continue to grow in number. A 2022
study found that software failures cost US companies a staggering
$2.41 trillion annually, up from $2.08 trillion in 2020 [5]. Therefore,
there is a growing need to find ways to produce reliable software.
One avenue to improve software accuracy is to use program syn-
thesis techniques to automatically generate code that, by design,
will adhere to user-provided specifications of intended behavior.
Program synthesis has existed for decades [20, 25, 27] and has re-
mained an active research field [3, 13, 14, 26]. Recently, the program
synthesis community has considered how to utilize Large Language
Models (LLMs) to help generate code [1, 11, 18].
In this paper, we explore a human-in-the-loop synthesis frame-
work that modifies test driven development (TDD) to incorporate
LLMs. Our insight is that test code is conceptually easier to write
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
than implementation code. In particular, while the implementation
code must accurately reflect the intricate logic needed to satisfy
the system’s specifications, test code only needs to compare that a
given input produces the expected output. Using this insight, we
outline a TDD framework in which the user writes a unit test, a LLM
generates code such that this unit test now passes, and then the user
provides another unit test and the cycle repeats. While tests are
largely regarded as an approximation of intended behavior, which
can provide issues for traditional program synthesis techniques,
the human-in-the-loop design of our TDD framework enables the
user to incrementally guide code generation and course correct
the synthesis process through seeding a behavior correcting test to
the LLM. To evaluate the efficacy of this development process, we
perform an empirical study using LeetCode programs and ChatGPT.
Specifically, we make the following contributions:
LLM4TDD: We outline a code generation framework that modifies
test driven development to incorporate LLMs.
Evaluation: We investigate LLM4TDD over a range of LeetCode
problems to determine the impact different attributes of the problem
space have on the success of LLM4TDD.
Best Practices: Based on our experiments, we destill a series of
guidelines for how best leverage our LLM4TDD framework to in-
crementally generate code.
Dataset for TDD in LLMs: We establish a dataset consisting of
LeetCode problems, test suites and prompts: https://github.com/
SanyogitaPiya/LLM4TDD/tree/main.
2 TEST DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT
In this section, we provide an overview of the traditional test driven
development process.
Test driven development is an incremental software develop-
ment methodology that focuses on creating tests before the imple-
mentation. Specifically, for a given iteration, a software developer
considers a test, if it fails, then the developer adds just enough func-
tionality to the code such that the test case now passes. Then, the
process restarts with a new test under consideration. As needed, be-
tween iterations, the underlying code is refactored. As an example,
consider building a calculator program and starting with a test that
adds 2 and 3 together. The first iteration of TDD would produce:
def test_add_positives
assert add(2,3) == 5
def add(x, y):
return 5
The minimal code the user needs to create in order for this test to
pass is to simply have the add method directly return “5. ”
arXiv:2312.04687v1  [cs.SE]  7 Dec 2023

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Anon.
Identify
problem
Generate
test suite
(TS)
Set up code
execution
environment
TDD
interaction
prompt
to LLM
Test(s)
pass?
Test failure or hint
prompt to LLM
Have all tests from
TS been evaluated?
Document
Results
No
Yes
No
Yes
Figure 1: Overview of the LLM4TDD Process
In the next iteration, the user would pick another test for add:
def test_add_positives
assert add(2,3) == 5
def test_add_mixed
assert add(-2,3) == 1
def add(x, y):
return x + y
In order to make the new and original test pass, the user will
now update the function to add the two integers, x and y, together.
2.1 Motivation for Integrating LLMs
In this paper, we investigate the effectiveness of a modified TDD
process, LLM4TDD, that uses LLMs to generate the implementation
code as the user gives guidance by providing test cases as prompts.
Our motivation is two-fold. First, LLM4TDD is designed to keep
a degree of developer ownership over the implementation, while
separating out the error-prone task of actually writing the imple-
mentation. In the end, writing test code is logically simpler than
writing implementation code. All the user needs to do to create test
code is to (1) set up an initial state with values given to all rele-
vant variables, (2) execute the method and (3) compare the actual
output to the expected output. In contrast, implementation code re-
quires the user to logically produce a series of statements that when
executed, achieve the desired effect. This can involve nested con-
trol structures, recursion, and efficient but error-prone algorithms
designs such as divide and conquer or dynamic programming.
Second, developer trust in accepting an automatically generated
program is a known barrier to adoption of program synthesis, as
synthesis techniques are largely black-box [ 10, 15, 16]. By main-
taining human interaction throughout our process, our hope is
that LLM4TDD avoids the issue of trust. In particular, academic
and industrial case studies have highlighted that the test driven
development process leads to developer’s feeling increased confi-
dence and comprehension of their code [2, 21]. Although developers
using LLM4TDD are not personally writing the implementation,
the developer still witnesses incremental changes to the code that
transform the code to address the specific behavior captured by
their test. Therefore, LLM4TDD can still benefit from TTD’s ability
to increase confidence and comprehension of code.
3 THE LLM4TDD PROCESS
This section provides an overview of the LLM4TDD workflow,
including how prompt interactions are set up, and the iterative
process for code development and evaluation. This workflow is also
captured in the flowchart diagram seen in Figure 1.
The first two blocks of the diagram in Figure 1 are effectively
the input to the LLM4TDD framework. First, a problem should be
selected that the LLM4TDD process will be used to generate code
for. In our evaluation, this is LeetCode challenges, but this could be
any function a developer needs to produce to satisfy their project
requirement(s). Second, a test suite is needed that will serve as the
bank of tests incrementally sent to the LLM as prompts. From there,
LLM4TDD has the developer set up a coding environment, such
as Eclipse or Visual Studio Code. This environment will be used to
execute tests against the source code generated. Then, to start the
iterative part of the LLM4TDD process, we provide a LLM with a
prompt that contains a test case and instructions on how to perform
TDD. To illustrate, here is our initial prompt template:
You are tasked with solving a coding problem using Test-
Driven Development principles. Your goal is to implement a
function/method to satisfy a set of predefined tests. Your func-
tion/method should return the expected output for all tests.
The function name is [function signature]:
Your task is to iteratively modify this function based on provided
tests. If the test case fails, you should:
Suggest code modifications to make the test case pass or ask for
clarifications if needed, such as constraints or edge cases.
Continue this process until all the defined test cases pass.
During the process, make sure you provide explanations and jus-
tifications for code changes.
The first test to satisfy is [test]
As tests are given as prompts to the LLM, tests are also added
to the code execution environment. In addition, the LLM response
is also transferred to the code execution environment. We then
check to see if the generated code actually passes the current test
suite. If a test fails, LLM4TDD has an inner loop in which a prompt
providing feedback and asking for code modifications is given to
the LLM, following the prompt template outlined below:
Unit test [testid] is failing. Modify code to pass all the test cases
and provide an explanation for the modification.

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
LLM4TDD: Best Practices for Test Driven Development Using Large Language Models Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
RQ2 RQ3 RQ4 RQ5 RQ6 RQ7
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Research Questions
Number of Leetcode Problems
Easy Medium Hard
Figure 2: Number and Difficulty of Leetcode Problems
Once all tests pass, we restart the cycle with a new test. The
LLM4TDD process terminates once all tests in the input test suite
pass. If there developer is not satisfied, the LLM4TDD can be con-
tinued by generating more tests.
4 EMPIRICAL EV ALUATION
In this section, we investigate the efficacy of LLM4TDD.
4.1 Experimental Data
We conducted our experiments using LeetCode challenges [ 17].
LeetCode is an online judging platform for coding problems in
which users are given a problem statement, a few example test
cases, and a blank method signature. From there, users can create
a solution and submit it for evaluation against an oracle test suite.
LeetCode includes over 2,300 problems, which are subdivided into
easy, medium and hard difficulty levels. For our study, we selected
a benchmark of 70 problems, with 25 easy, 24 medium, and 21 hard
problems, which have also been used in recent work [19, 22]. All
problems are implemented in Python. In addition, the problems
span both those available before and after September 2021, which is
the cutoff date for training the ChatGPT model. While all 70 are used
for RQ1, due to that nature of some of our research questions, not
all problems were used to asses every question. Figure 2 shows the
breakdown of problems used for each remaining research question.
We also consider two different sources of tests:
• Manual Test Suites:To provide a manual test suite, we followed
an input space partitioning philosophy to design test cases.
• Automated Test Suites: To provide an automatically generated
test suite, we used the Pynguin tool to generate unit tests.
Both test suites are formatted for capability with the pytest unit
test framework. For most research questions, we use our manually
generated test suite as a default.
Input space partitioning is a test generation strategy in which
tests are generated based on characteristics derived over the input
variables. Each characteristic is broken down into disjoint and
complete blocks that create equivalence classes spanning the input
domain of at least one input variable. As an example, consider
the LeetCode problem 283: Move Zeros, which given an integer
array, the code should move all 0’s to the end while maintaining
the relative order of the non-zero elements. One characteristic is
Unique
Code
Repeated
Code
New Code
Passes Prev
New Code
Fails Prev
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Number of Leetcode Problems
Easy Medium Hard
Figure 3: Frequency of Behaviors Encountered in LLM4TDD
whether or not the array has zeros in it, which leads to two tests: an
array with zeros and an array without zeros. Another characteristic
is the size of the array, which leads to three tests: an empty array,
an array with one value, and an array with more than one value.
We choose to produce tests following the input space partitioning
strategy in order to (1) have a systematic method to uniformly guide
test generation across all of our evaluation problems, (2) have a test
generation approach that is independent of the implementation, as
we do not know the implementation at the start of the LLM4TDD
workflow, and (3) a recent study highlighted the efficacy of input
space partitioning for industry scale projects [24].
4.2 SetUp and Tool Selection for LLM4TDD
The LLM4TDD process requires a problem to generate code for, a
test suite, a code editor with the ability to execute unit tests and a
Large Language Model. For our problems, we first select the subset
of LeetCode challenges from our dataset that are relevant to help
us evaluate each research question. For each LeetCode problem,
we perform input space partitioning once to establish the manual
test suite that is then used for all research questions. As our code
editor we use the Visual Studio Code IDE and as our LLM we use
ChatGPT. While separate iterations, the entire LLM4TDD cycle for
a LeetCode program is done within the same session.
To document the results, we store the responses from ChatGPT
as well as the ChatGPT session. In addition, we check the generated
code against LeetCode’s backend test suite, which we treat as our
ground truth. This step ensures that the code not only meets the
test cases encountered during the LLM4TDD process, but also per-
formed successfully on the judging test suite provided by LeetCode.
4.3 Results
In this section, we present several research questions, and highlight,
in gray, best practices we found based on our exploration.
4.3.1 RQ1: What is the performance of LLM4TDD?. To measure
performance, we consider both the rate at which LLM4TDD suc-
cessfully produces correct code and the overhead of LLM4TDD in
terms of the ratio of tests to prompts needed to produce correct
code. The number of prompts is a more direct measure of developer
effort for LLM4TDD; however, the number of prompts is tied to the
number of tests, which varies across problems. Therefore, we focus

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Anon.
1. def test_parentheses_with_letters(self):
2. s = "a(b)c"
3. result = code301(s)
4. self.assertEqual(result, ["a(b)c"])
1. while queue:
2. current = queue.popleft()
3. if is_valid(current):
4. result.append(current)
5. continue
6. for i in range(len(current)):
7. if current[i]in {`(',`)'}:
8. new_str = current[:i] + current[i + 1:]
9. if new_strnot in result and new_strnot in queue:
10. queue.append(new_str)
11. return result
1. while queue:
2. current = queue.popleft()
3. if is_valid(current):
4. result.append(current)
5.
6. for i in range(len(current)):
7. if current[i]in {`(',`)'}:
8. new_str = current[:i] + current[i + 1:]
9. if new_strnot in queue and is_valid(new_str):
10. queue.append(new_str)
11. return result
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 4: Illustration of a Test Changing From Passing to Failing Between Iterations.
on the ratio of prompt to tests. Ideally, the ratio of tests to prompts
would be 1:1, which would mean ChatGPT updates the code and
passes the new test on the first try every time.
Of the 70 problems, our LLM4TDD process is able to successfully
generate correct code, according to our ground truth, for 62 out of
70 problems (88.5%). For the 8 problems that do not pass LeetCode’s
oracle test suite, three produce code that passes our manual test
suite but not LeetCode’s test suite and five gets stuck in a code
repetition pattern. In terms of overhead, our data shows that the
average ratio of the number of tests to the number of prompts is
5:8. To explore why the ratio is not 1:1, Figure 3 displays the rate
at which we encounter different behaviors across the dataset. The
first two bars represent how many LeetCode problems ChatGPT
produces new code updates for versus how many problems Chat-
GPT gets stuck repeating code that require hint prompts. The third
and forth bars illustrates how many LeetCode problems ChatGPT
successfully generates code that passes all tests versus how many
LeetCode problems ChatGPT creates an iteration that causes a pre-
viously passing test to fail that require test failure prompts. For
each behavior, we include a breakdown by difficulty level.
For 27 of our problems (38.6%), ChatGPT falls into a cycle of
repeatedly suggesting the same faulty code. Across the difficulty
levels, 32% of the easy problems, 54.2% of the medium problems
and 28.6% of the hard problems demonstrate this behavior. Upon
investigation of these problems, we discovered that ChatGPT fo-
cuses on making small code modifications between iterations that
do not fundamentally change what the underlying code is trying to
do, as seen in Figure 5 where ChatGPT only removes a variable. In
order to break free from this cycle, manual intervention in the form
of feedback became imperative. Our LLM4TDD process involved
two escalating types of hint prompts. First, we use a simple prompt
indicating that the code has not changed to address the test:
This is the same code as the previous one you generated. Please
carefully review all the tests and modify the code.
Second, if, despite such feedback, the subsequent code generated
remains nearly identical, then we took this as an indication that
ChatGPT requires additional hints on actual implementation details,
such as what data structure(s) to use or whether to insert loops. To
see if ChatGPT could make the adjustments, we provide hints on the
data structures that should be set up. If ChatGPT continued to repeat
the same code suggestion more than 3 times, then we considered
the LLM4TDD process to be unable to provide an answer. Namely,
further hints on the code’s structure would effectively result in the
developer writing the code themselves.
Figure 5: Example of Preference for Minor Adjustments
For 23 of our problems (32.9%), between iterations of LLM4TDD,
ChatGPT would make alterations to the code that cause the newly
introduced test to pass, but would cause at least one of the previ-
ously introduced test cases to now fail. For example, for LeetCode
problem 301: Remove Invalid Parentheses, the initial test seen in
Figure 4 (a) was satisfied by the code generated in Figure 4 (b). How-
ever, in a subsequent iteration, ChatGPT produced the code seen in
Figure 4 (c), over which this test fails. To address this, we would
give our failing test prompt seen in section 3. Across the difficulty
levels, 24% of the easy problems, 58.3% of the medium problems
and 14.3% of the hard problems demonstrate this behavior.
These two issues are the reason our LLM4TDD workflow has an
inner loop in the iteration that accounts for the developer provid-
ing additional hints, leading to the 5:8 test to prompt ratio, with
medium difficulty problems contributing the most to this. LeetCode
medium problems often have a combination of enough algorithm
complexity mixed with problems designed to be a coding challenge
rather than solving a real world problem, that leads to more prompt
interventions. However, the additional prompts are lightweight: the

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
LLM4TDD: Best Practices for Test Driven Development Using Large Language Models Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Figure 6: Bias Towards Function Name Over Test Case
test failure prompts simply conveys the behavior observed in the
code execution environment and the hint prompt only requires the
developer to think about what data structures might be appropriate.
Overall, with a success rate of 88.5%, LLM4TDD is worth consid-
ering to generate function-level code. However, the best practices
outlined in the remainder of this paper are important to factor in,
as ensuring ChatGPT does not start off solving the wrong problem
is crucial to reduce the effort of LLM4TDD.
4.3.2 RQ2: What attributes of the test cases impact LLM4TDD?.
During our experiments, we started to notice several patterns in
how the test cases impacted the LLM4TDD process. To dig deeper,
we collected 15 problems whose initial attempts to solve using
LLM4TDD caused us to change our test case design practices.
Name-Based Assumptions. One of the key observations we
made is that ChatGPT would make assumptions about the func-
tion’s behavior based solely on the function name in the prompt.
ChatGPT would make these assumptions even if the interpretation
is directly countered by the actual test case. To test this, we mixed
function names from one problem with tests from a different prob-
lem. To illustrate, Figure 6 shows ChatGPT’s response when the test
case in the prompt is for LeetCode problem 768: Max Chunks To
Make Sorted II, but the function name of findMedianSortedArrays
is given in the prompt. In this case, ChatGPT disregards the ac-
tual test and only generates code based on the function name. As
mentioned earlier, ChatGPT is conservative with its incremental
code changes. Thus, when ChatGPT tries to solve the wrong prob-
lem, more prompts are needed to correct the misunderstanding.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
0
10
20
LeetCode Problems
Number of Prompts
Manual ISP Automated
Figure 7: Comparison of Different Test Suite Strategies
However, we did not experience this same issue with test names.
Although ChatGPT also uses test names for context clues, descrip-
tive test names, like def test_n_is_odd() , did not lead to ChatGPT
ignoreing the content of the test.
ChatGPT will ignore the test if a descriptive function name is
used. Therefore, it is best to sanitize the function name to a
generic representation. However, it is ok, and recommended,
to provide descriptive test names.
Ambiguity. Many test cases initially appeared ambiguous to
ChatGPT, where a test case could be valid for multiple actions,
which could result in ChatGPT making an assumption about the
intended functionality of the method that passes the individual test
but is ultimately not the behavior we are trying to generate. As tests
are added, even if the test corrects the original incorrect assumption,
it is possible for multiple tests to continue to present an ambiguous
outline of what behavior the function should have. For example,
for LeetCode problem 768: Max Chunks To Make Sorted II, when
the test array of [5,4,3,2,1] was given with expected output of 1,
ChatGPT initially misunderstood the problem and assumed that the
task was to select the minimum number of the array. Subsequently,
when a new test was introduced for [2, 1, 3, 4, 4] with output
of 4, ChatGPT perceived the task as finding the number of unique
the elements in the array. When the next test was given, [0, 0,
1, 1, 1] with output of 5, ChatGPT persistently produced code to
finding the number of unique the elements in the array, expecting
it to fulfill the new test, even though it was unsuitable.
Unit tests should be clear and unambiguous. It is best to avoid
using input-output pairs for tests that could be used to test
multiple different functions.
4.3.3 RQ3: Are manual or automatic test suites better for LLM4TDD?.
We compared the effectiveness of manually derived test suites using
input space partitioning with automatically generated test suites,
to see if there is a difference in performance. Figure 7 shows the
comparison between the number of prompts to generate correct
code for LeetCode problems for manual and automatically generate
test suites, with the LeetCode problems arranged from easy to hard.
On average, the automatically generated test suites require 2×
more prompts to solve the challenges. This difference grows as

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Anon.
we move from easy problems to hard problems. For hard difficult
problems (9-15), the automatically generated test suites require
2.5× more prompts. While a manually generated test suite will
require more effort to produce initially, the manual test suites leads
to less effort for conducting LLM4TDD cycles. Besides number of
prompts, the automated test suite can introduce the possibility that
the user misunderstands what behavior the test is checking for,
since they did not personally write the test, which could impact
their comprehension of the code generated in a LLM4TDD cycle
despite the TDD workflow.
Input space partitioning test suites reduce the number of it-
erations in the LLM4TDD cycle, but do require more time to
produce. Overall, the test generation strategy should reflect the
tradeoff desired between effort and developer comprehension.
4.3.4 RQ4: How does the datatype of the input and output variables
affect LLM4TDD?. To evaluate this, we considered all combinations
of integer and string inputs with boolean, integer and string outputs.
For each pair, we selected 3 LeetCode challenges, resulting in 18
different coding problems. Figure 8 depicts how many prompts the
LLM4TDD process needs to arrive at the correct solutions, broken
down by combinations of input and output datatypes. Specifically,
the x axis depicts the data type of the input variables and each
colored bar depicts a different return value data type. The total
number of prompts, depicted by the y axis, is the average across
the problems for that associated combination.
As Figure 8 shows, regardless of the input variable’s datatype,
the performance of LLM4TDD is the best for boolean return values,
followed by string return values and lastly integer return values.
At a high level, a boolean return value typically means that there is
a concept the method is checking to see if the input exhibits. As a
result of this simplicity, the LLM4TDD process needs less prompts.
In terms of the datatype of the input variables, Figure 8 highlights
that less prompts are needed to solve problems that reason over
string inputs compared to problems that reason over integers inputs.
While strings can take a wide range of forms, there are generally
fewer common string manipulations compared to common integer
manipulations. For instance, for string problems, ChatGPT would
start by generating code that would explore different substrings
of the original input and attempt different concatenations to try
and produce the expected output provided by the test. Often times,
the solution to a LeetCode problem that uses string-based input
variables involve taking these exact same steps to solve the problem.
As a result, there were prompts and thus less LLM4TDD cycles.
In addition, we found that string problems often exhibit less
ambiguity. In particular, string problems often display the charac-
teristic that once code is generated that satisfies one test for an
input space partition block, that code would produce the right be-
havior for all other tests in that block. This consistency allowed
ChatGPT to quickly generate the appropriate solutions, leading
to less LLM4TDD cycles. As an example, consider the LeetCode
problem 816: Ambiguous Coordinates, where the input is a string
and the output is a list of strings. A test highlighting two single-
digit coordinates (s=“34”) demonstrated this pattern, where this test
lead to the generation of code that could handle all two single-digit
coordinates, e.g. s=“56” or s=“00. ”
String Int
0
2
4
6
8
10
Input Data Types
Number of Prompts
Boolean Output String Output Int Output
Figure 8: Comparison of Different Datatype Combinations
String-based methods require less prompts, as they often in-
volve similar high-level steps to solve. If unique string manipu-
lations are needed, then that should be represented in the first
test to avoid ChatGPT starting off in the wrong direction.
In contrast, integer inputs often undergo a wider range of ma-
nipulations and tests depicting integer manipulations are often
ambiguous, where the expected output appears that it could be
because of one of several different actions. This is highlighted in
RQ2, where the tests for Max Chunks To Make Sorted II additionally
appeared to suggest that the problem to be addressed by the code
is to find the minimum value or number of unique elements. On
average, integer inputs require 1.2 × more prompts compared to
string inputs. Broken down across the output datatypes, integer
inputs require 1.30× more prompts for boolean outputs, 1.12× more
prompts for string outputs and 1.10 × more prompts for integer
outputs compared to problems with string inputs.
Integers based problems are notably vulnerable to accidentally
ambiguous test cases. In addition, names of tests could help
narrow the space of possible Integer operations to help Chat-
GPT find the right series of steps needed to solve the problem.
Irregardless of datatypes present, we did notice two trends. First,
LeetCode hard problems require a relatively higher number of test
cases to reduce ambiguity, which indicates that ChatGPT strug-
gles to generate code for complex problems, even for string input,
boolean output problems. Second, ChatGPT exhibited improved
performance when there was a clear correlation between the input
and the output of a test case to real world concepts and not manip-
ulations just for a LeetCode challenge. For instance, when provided
with input “IV” and the expected output of 4, ChatGPT assumed the
code should translate a Roman numeral into the equivalent Arabic
numeral.
4.3.5 RQ5: How does the test prompt template impact the perfor-
mance of LLM4TDD?. To investigate the impact of test presentation
on ChatGPT’s performance, we conducted an experiment with
10 LeetCode problems where we explored two different prompt
formats: (1) descriptive tests were provided in plain text without
explicit test code and (2) tests were merged into a single meta-test
that is appended too for each new test. Figure 9 shows the com-
parison between these two input formats, along with our default

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
LLM4TDD: Best Practices for Test Driven Development Using Large Language Models Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
LeetCode Problems
Number of Prompts
Plain Text Meta Test Default
Figure 9: Comparison of Different Test Prompt Formats
prompt format, in terms of the number of prompts needed to reach
the correct code solution for each LeetCode problem. The LeetCode
problems are arranged from easy to hard difficulty.
Text Descriptions. To investigate whether natural language
instructions improve ChatGPT’s ability to iteratively generate code,
we modified our prompt template to textually outline the test. To
illustrate, below is an example of the snippet of a prompt illustrating
our format for textual descriptions of a test case:
The first test is: test1 with input array [1,2] and k = 3, expected
output: 9.
Overall, we found that plain text descriptions performed the
worse, needing on average 2.0 × more prompts that the default
prompt and 1.67× more prompts that the meta-test prompt. We
noticed two main issues when ChatGPT tried to satisfy text de-
scriptions of tests. First, with this prompt format, ChatGPT has a
tendency to produce incomplete code and leave to-dos in the com-
ments, which led to us having to give additional guidance prompts
to ask ChatGPT to produce complete code. Second, with this prompt
format, ChatGPT would often hard code tests as consecutive if-else
statements to produce the input-output pair.
Notably, even though tests in plain text were given, ChatGPT
would convert this plain text into test code and then generate
code over it’s test cases. As a result, text-based description insert
an indirect layer that ChatGPT translates from, which introduces
another point in the process where ChatGPT can make mistakes.
While plain text is useful to give contextual information about
forbidden usage of libraries or resources, we do not recom-
mended the use plain text instead of test code.
Appending to a Meta-Test. As mentioned in RQ1, a problem
we encountered moving from one LLM4TDD iteration to the next
is that ChatGPT would sometimes generate code that fails to pass
previously satisfied tests when a new test is added in a subsequent
iteration. Therefore, another test prompt design we investigated
was to create a meta unit test that consolidated multiple unit tests
into a single test case with multiple assert statements. The idea
was to see if outlining a clearly connected series of expected behav-
iors could prevent ChatGPT from forgetting earlier test cases as it
progresses through subsequent iterations.
Figure 10: ChatGPT Mimicing LeetCode
We found that a meta-test prompt performed better than the
text prompt, but on average required 1.5 × as many prompts as
the default prompt. Unfortunately, a big issue is that the meta-test
did not decrease the rate at which we encountered the problem of
a new code failing previous tests. Moreover, the new test format
obscures ChatGPT’s interpretation of what test is failing, as there
is an inherent order dependency of assert statements within the
consolidated test. In this approach, if one assert statement fails, sub-
sequent ones could be considered unexecuted. The lack of visibility
into which later assert statements succeed or fail after the initial
failing assert statement hindered the ability to provide targeted
hints prompts. For instance, when ChatGPT failed to satisfy the
third assert statement, it was understood that the first two had suc-
ceeded. However, the subsequent prompt given to satisfy the third
assert statement resulted in the failure of later assert statements
that were also failing the previous iteration.
The use of a meta-test is not recommended as the format can
obscure the transfer of knowledge to the LLM and does not
prevent tests passing one iteration and failing later iterations.
4.3.6 RQ6: When the same failing code is repeated for multiple iter-
ations, is the source of these code snippets traceable to solution blogs
or discussion group posts? In an effort to understand the origin of
recurring failing code snippets generated by ChatGPT, we identified
7 LeetCode problems in which we encountered this problem from
before ChatGPT’s data cutoff. The goal was to see whether these
repeatedly failing solutions are linked to commonly posted incor-
rect solutions on public discussion forums like Stack Overflow. Our
idea was that a frequently reoccurring incorrect solution could get
misunderstood as the correct solution. However, we found that the
code snippets produced by ChatGPT exhibited only minor similari-
ties to content on these websites, with most similarities connected

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Anon.
to well known algorithms. Overall, the absence of direct replica-
tion from online sources suggests that ChatGPT may be producing
these recurring failing solutions based on learned patterns from its
training data, rather than directly extracting them from existing
faulty solutions.
4.3.7 RQ7: How does ChatGPT’s performance differ for LeetCode
problems before and after its knowledge cutoff? As seen in Fig-
ure 10, when prompted with the function name def code234(head:
Optional[ListNode]) -> bool: for problem 234 on LeetCode with-
out any accompanying test cases, ChatGPT accurately predicted the
intended functionality. Moreover, the test case created by ChatGPT
is the first example given by LeetCode for problem 234. This ini-
tially led to suspicion that the model, with its knowledge extending
up to a certain cutoff, might have the ability to recognize subtle
hints and associate them with specific problemse.
However, a deeper investigation, involving 8 LeetCode problems
among which 4 were before cutoff and 4 were after cutoff, revealed
a guessing pattern. This discrepancy suggested that the initial ac-
curate identification might have been a coincidental success rather
than a systematic capability tied to the model’s knowledge cut-
off. Therefore, ChatGPT’s problem recognition capabilities and its
performance in identifying LeetCode problems is likely context-
dependent and not solely determined by chronological proximity
to the knowledge cutoff.
The LLM4TDD process should not vary for a problem regard-
less of when that problem entered the public sphere.
5 RELATED WORK
Program Synthesis. Program synthesis is a mature yet active
research topic [3, 4, 7, 13, 14, 26]. Traditional synthesis approaches
often involve different strategies for searching the space of possible
programs to find one that matches the user’s intent. In recent years,
program synthesis techniques utilizing large language models have
been explored [ 1, 11, 18]. In addition, several LLMs have been
developed specifically for generating code, including Codex [ 1],
CodeGen [23], InCoder [6] and PolyCoder [28].
Test Driven Development. Most of the research focusing on
test driven development investigates the impact it has on the quality
of software produced. Several studies have found that test driven de-
velopment practices lead to better code, often measured by the code
passing more test cases, at the expense of the development cycle
taking more time [8, 9, 12]. A study conducted at IBM additionally
found that developers felt that they better understood the system’s
design when using test driven development compared to other de-
velopment cycles and that developers felt that their code was better
designed and more readable [21]. Test driven development has also
been evaluated in an academic setting, in which students reported
feeling as if they better understood their programs and this also
felt more confident in making changes to their code [2].
6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper introduces LLM4TDD, an incremental development
process in which the user guides code generation by gradually
presenting unit tests to the LLM for the LLM to generate code
to pass. To evaluate LLM4TDD, we conducted an empirical study
using LeetCode challenges. The results of this study led to several
best practices for LLM4TDD, such as sanitizing method names and
reducing ambiguity in test with careful consideration for integers.
As future work, we plan to explore how LLM4TDD performs over
other LLMs, such as Codex, and languages, such as Java.
REFERENCES
[1] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira
Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman,
et al. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[2] Chetan Desai, David Janzen, and Kyle Savage. 2008. A survey of evidence for
test-driven development in academia. ACM SIGCSE Bulletin 40, 2 (2008), 97–101.
[3] Yu Feng, Ruben Martins, Yuepeng Wang, Isil Dillig, and Thomas W Reps. 2017.
Component-based synthesis for complex APIs. In POPL. 599–612.
[4] John K Feser, Swarat Chaudhuri, and Isil Dillig. 2015. Synthesizing data structure
transformations from input-output examples. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 50, 6 (2015),
229–239.
[5] Consortium for Information and Software Quality. 2023. The Cost of Poor
Software Quality in the US: A 2022 Report. (2023).
[6] Daniel Fried, Armen Aghajanyan, Jessy Lin, Sida Wang, Eric Wallace, Freda Shi,
Ruiqi Zhong, Wen-tau Yih, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. 2022. Incoder: A
generative model for code infilling and synthesis. ICLR (2022).
[7] Joel Galenson, Philip Reames, Rastislav Bodik, Björn Hartmann, and Koushik
Sen. 2014. Codehint: Dynamic and interactive synthesis of code snippets. In ICSE.
653–663.
[8] Boby George and Laurie Williams. 2003. An initial investigation of test driven
development in industry. In SAC. 1135–1139.
[9] Boby George and Laurie Williams. 2004. A structured experiment of test-driven
development. Information and software Technology 46, 5 (2004), 337–342.
[10] Sumit Gulwani, Oleksandr Polozov, Rishabh Singh, et al. 2017. Program synthesis.
Foundations and Trends® in Programming Languages 4, 1-2 (2017), 1–119.
[11] Srinivasan Iyer, Ioannis Konstas, Alvin Cheung, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. Map-
ping language to code in programmatic context. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.09588
(2018).
[12] David Janzen and Hossein Saiedian. 2008. Does test-driven development really
improve software design quality? Ieee Software 25, 2 (2008), 77–84.
[13] Naoki Kobayashi, Taro Sekiyama, Issei Sato, and Hiroshi Unno. 2021. Toward
neural-network-guided program synthesis and verification. In SAS. 236–260.
[14] Viktor Kuncak, Mikaël Mayer, Ruzica Piskac, and Philippe Suter. 2010. Complete
functional synthesis. ACM Sigplan Notices 45, 6 (2010), 316–329.
[15] Tessa Lau. 2009. Why programming-by-demonstration systems fail: Lessons
learned for usable ai. AI Magazine 30, 4 (2009), 65–65.
[16] Tak Yeon Lee, Casey Dugan, and Benjamin B Bederson. 2017. Towards under-
standing human mistakes of programming by example: an online user study. In
IUI. 257–261.
[17] LeetCode. 2023. https://leetcode.com/. (2023).
[18] Zhe Liu, Chunyang Chen, Junjie Wang, Xing Che, Yuekai Huang, Jun Hu, and
Qing Wang. 2023. Fill in the blank: Context-aware automated text input genera-
tion for mobile gui testing. In ICSE. IEEE, 1355–1367.
[19] Zhijie Liu, Yutian Tang, Xiapu Luo, Yuming Zhou, and Liang Feng Zhang. 2023.
No Need to Lift a Finger Anymore? Assessing the Quality of Code Generation
by ChatGPT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.04838 (2023).
[20] Zohar Manna and Richard J Waldinger. 1971. Toward automatic program synthe-
sis. Commun. ACM 14, 3 (1971), 151–165.
[21] E Michael Maximilien and Laurie Williams. 2003. Assessing test-driven develop-
ment at IBM. In ICSE. 564–569.
[22] Nhan Nguyen and Sarah Nadi. 2022. An empirical evaluation of GitHub copilot’s
code suggestions. In MSR. 1–5.
[23] Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou,
Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. 2022. Codegen: An open large language
model for code with multi-turn program synthesis.arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13474
(2022).
[24] Jeff Offutt and Chandra Alluri. 2014. An industrial study of applying input space
partitioning to test financial calculation engines. Empirical Software Engineering
19 (2014), 558–581.
[25] David E Shaw, William R Swartout, and C Cordell Green. 1975. Inferring LISP
Programs From Examples.. In IJCAI, Vol. 75. 260–267.
[26] Armando Solar-Lezama, Liviu Tancau, Rastislav Bodik, Sanjit Seshia, and Vijay
Saraswat. 2006. Combinatorial sketching for finite programs. In ASPLOS. 404–
415.
[27] Richard J Waldinger and Richard CT Lee. 1969. PROW: A step toward automatic
program writing. In IJCAI. 241–252.
[28] Frank F Xu, Uri Alon, Graham Neubig, and Vincent Josua Hellendoorn. 2022. A
systematic evaluation of large language models of code. In MAPS. 1–10.