
===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
Test-Driven Development for Code Generation
Noble Saji Mathews
University of Waterloo, Canada
noblesaji.mathews@uwaterloo.ca
Meiyappan Nagappan
University of Waterloo, Canada
mei.nagappan@uwaterloo.ca
Abstract
Recent Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated
significant capabilities in generating code snippets directly
from problem statements. This increasingly automated pro-
cess mirrors traditional human-led software development,
where code is often written in response to a requirement.
Historically, Test-Driven Development (TDD) has proven its
merit, requiring developers to write tests before the func-
tional code, ensuring alignment with the initial problem
statements. Applying TDD principles to LLM-based code
generation offers one distinct benefit: it enables developers
to verify the correctness of generated code against prede-
fined tests. This paper investigates if and how TDD can
be incorporated into AI-assisted code-generation processes.
We experimentally evaluate our hypothesis that providing
LLMs like GPT-4 and Llama 3 with tests in addition to the
problem statements enhances code generation outcomes. We
experimented with established function-level code genera-
tion benchmarks such as MBPP and HumanEval. Our results
consistently demonstrate that including test cases leads to
higher success in solving programming challenges. We as-
sert that TDD is a promising paradigm for helping ensure
that the code generated by LLMs effectively captures the
requirements.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Soft-
ware development techniques; • Computing method-
ologies → Artificial intelligence.
Keywords: Code Generation, LLM, TDD, Testing, Software
Engineering
1 INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) are transforming software
development. However, the importance of correctness in
this domain remains a challenge. Despite their advanced
capabilities, LLMs often exude deceptive confidence in their
outputs, which can be misleadingly erroneous [18, 24, 25].
This issue becomes especially critical when the cost of failure
is high. The potential pitfalls of LLMs, such as generating
syntactically correct but logically flawed code or failing to
adhere to specific requirements, underscore the need for
stringent validation mechanisms. Ensuring correctness is
not just about preventing errors. It is about building trust in
machine-generated code and ensuring it meets the rigorous
standards required in real-world applications. Programmers
will need to act as quality assurance specialists, spending
more time checking the validity of autogenerated code, uti-
lizing both traditional testing tools and advanced automated
program repair techniques to ensure code quality [19]
Generating tests has gained additional momentum with
the emergence of LLMs, and recent techniques boast test-
ing performance similar to human-written tests. Past work,
however, has questioned how coverage as a goal may not
be an effective target to set [11]. If LLMs fail to handle edge
cases regarding code, generated tests derived from the im-
plementation can be as wrong as the generated code itself.
While LLMs might be useful in helping developers formal-
ize intent, this paper does not seek to answer the question
"When and how should AI write tests?". This work rather
seeks to explore whether there might be a better paradigm
for utilizing tests in LLM-based code generation.
Test-driven development (TDD) [ 2] offers a structured
approach to mitigate the risks associated with code gener-
ation. This software development process revolves around
the repetitive cycle of writing a test for a specific function or
feature, developing code to pass that test, and subsequently
refactoring the code to meet the desired standards of quality
and efficiency. Hence, TDD could serve as a critical frame-
work for validating the correctness and functionality of LLM-
generated code.
There is extensive research into generating test cases from
code, whether human or machine-authored [15, 22]. How-
ever, the reciprocal process has not been systematically eval-
uated, particularly regarding how human-written tests (cre-
ated as part of the TDD process) can improve LLM-generated
code. By examining how LLMs respond to the additional
context and constraints of test cases, we can gain insights
into their potential to enhance code correctness through
a more informed code generation process. While it may
seem obvious to assume that including tests alongside prob-
lem statements will inherently enhance the correctness of
machine-generated code, this assumption requires careful
examination. The actual impact of human-written tests on
improving the quality of LLM-generated code remains under-
explored. Specifically, the extent to which LLMs can interpret
and utilize these tests to refine their code outputs has not
been thoroughly investigated. This gap highlights a criti-
cal area for empirical study: measuring the effectiveness of
test cases in guiding LLMs toward generating more accurate
code that captures requirements which may not be explicitly
stated (much like the goals of TDD).
In our empirical study, we create a simple frameworkTGen
to evaluate our research questions. TGen is rooted in TDD
arXiv:2402.13521v2  [cs.SE]  11 Jun 2024

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
Noble Saji Mathews and Meiyappan Nagappan
principles, requiring developers to precisely articulate their
coding intents through tests.TGen operates within a continu-
ous self-improving loop. Developers begin by detailing their
requirements and intended functionalities through a combi-
nation of problem statements and test cases. These test cases
then serve as a definitive guide for the expected behaviour
of the code, allowing TGen to generate code that adheres to
these requirements. Integral to the framework is an LLM-
based feedback mechanism designed to iteratively refine
and correct the generated code, ensuring it passes all pro-
vided unit tests. By leveraging test cases as a benchmark for
validation, TGen attempts to generate code satisfying these
requirements. In cases where TGen cannot create correct
code, by design, developers know that the code generated
does not pass all the test cases and, therefore, can correct
the code before including it in their projects.
We investigate whether incorporating tests in the code
generation process improves the model’s ability to generate
correct code and also discuss the impacts and challenges of
this approach. While we use TGen in our study for evalua-
tion, it’s important to note that our contribution is not the
framework itself but the empirical study we conduct. We
systematically explore whether the TDD paradigm works in
AI-driven code generation, under what conditions it is effec-
tive, and how tests can be useful. Our findings can support
or challenge the use of TDD in this context.
By integrating TDD, developers can continuously test
the outputs of LLMs against predefined specifications and
use cases. This helps identify and correct errors early in
the development process and aligns the model’s outputs
with the specific requirements of the task at hand. Thus,
the adoption of TDD for code generation could stand as a
promising strategy to enhance the practical utility of these
advanced AI systems in software development.
2 Research Questions
Our goal is to examine the baseline capabilities of neural
code generation and the incremental benefits introduced by
incorporating tests. Specifically, we explore if and how tests
are helpful through the following four research questions:
RQ1: How good is basic code generation? Basic neural
code generation, particularly with LLMs, has shown
promising results in various tasks. However, its effi-
cacy in complex coding scenarios without any test
information remains a subject of exploration. We aim
to evaluate the fundamental capabilities of these mod-
els in generating syntactically and logically correct
code, especially in standard programming tasks. This
investigation will provide insights into the baseline
performance of LLMs in code generation, setting a
benchmark for further discussions.
RQ2: Does providing test cases improve code genera-
tion? The foundational principle of TDD is that soft-
ware should be developed primarily by writing tests
before any functional code is written. This method
has historically led to robust, well-documented soft-
ware that is closely aligned with user requirements.
By requiring developers to define explicit tests up-
front, TDD ensures that all new code functions as
intended and adheres strictly to the specified require-
ments. This rigorous approach to software develop-
ment could be transformative when applied to the
code-generation capabilities of LLMs. We hypothe-
size that by providing LLMs like GPT-4 with both
problem statements and corresponding tests, the gen-
erated code will achieve the required functionality
and exhibit an enhanced adherence to the intended
specifications and requirements.
RQ3: Can failed tests help LLMs fix their mistakes?
We investigate the ability of LLMs to learn from their
errors through remediation loops. This involves as-
sessing whether LLMs can iteratively refine and cor-
rect their code outputs based on feedback or error
detection. The remediation loop in our study closely
mirrors the iterative cycle at the heart of TDD. In tra-
ditional TDD, the process involves initially writing
tests, which the new code then fails, leading develop-
ers to refine the function until it passes the tests. We
aim to explore the potential of LLMs to self-correct
as reported in past literature [ 28]and the ability to
align better the code they generate with the provided
specifications.
RQ4: Do the generated solutions only satisfy the sup-
plied tests or even unseen tests?This research ques-
tion explores a critical aspect of AI-generated code: its
robustness and generalizability beyond the explicitly
defined test cases. In traditional software development,
the ability of code to perform well under a variety of
scenarios—especially those not explicitly anticipated
during testing—is a hallmark of high-quality software.
TDD is grounded in the principle that tests are piv-
otal in improving design and functionality. However,
there remain questions about the extent to which this
principle applies when code is generated by LLMs.
In addition to these research questions, we delve deeper
into the complexities of incorporating tests, discussing our
findings further through the following additional explorations:
EXP1: How does problem difficulty affect these results?
We hypothesize that a problem statement’s difficulty
could significantly impact an LLM’s performance in
code generation. We aim to explore how varying levels
of problem complexity influence the model’s ability to
generate correct code that satisfies the requirements
expressed by the statement and supplied test cases.

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
Test-Driven Development for Code Generation
We curate our own dataset consisting of competitive
programming problems of different difficulty levels
and attempt to understand how increasing difficulty
impacts our approach.
EXP2: How many tests is good enough? Determining the
optimal number of tests necessary for effective code
generation by LLMs is a key concern. In traditional
TDD, the number and quality of tests are crucial for en-
suring robust software. We aim to investigate how the
quantity of provided test cases influences the correct-
ness of the code generated by LLMs. While intuitively,
adding tests should only help clarify the requirements.
However, when working with LLMs, we are limited
by the context length of the model, which controls
how much information we can feed the model. By ex-
perimenting with varying numbers of tests, we wish
to identify if there exists a threshold that balances
thoroughness and efficiency, guiding best practices
for using tests to enhance LLM-based code generation.
EXP3: Do these results hold with an open model like
Llama 3? While our approach is LLM agnostic, the
LLM itself plays a major role in our experiments, re-
quiring the ability to write correct code and review
and fix incorrect code. While there may exist an ideal
combination of different LLMs specialized for each of
these tasks, we wish to explore if this structure would
work with other models outside OpenAI’s GPT family
of models as well. By evaluating Meta’s LLama 3 under
the same conditions, we can assess if similar patterns
emerge, providing insights into the consistency and
reliability of our findings across different LLMs.
3 METHODOLOGY
We design our experiments to help evaluate the effectiveness
of integrating TDD with LLM-based code generation. We
aim to determine if tests affect LLMs and when they might
be useful.
3.1 Datasets Used
Evaluating code generation typically employs benchmark
datasets such as MBPP [1], HumanEval [6], CodeContests
[16], or APPS [12]. Recently, newer datasets have explored
class-level [9] and repository-level code completion [29], as
well as automated software engineering [13]. However, we
focus on function-level generation datasets like MBPP and
HumanEval for two reasons.
1. MBPP and HumanEval datasets are standard bench-
marks widely used to evaluate LLMs on code genera-
tion leaderboards [9, 18].
2. Repository-level code generation requires context about
the codebase, making it complex and less controlled.
Class-level benchmarks can be evaluated in various
generation configurations, introducing many variables
complicating the analysis. Function-level generation
datasets like MBPP and HumanEval are relatively
more straightforward. These involve generating the
body of a function with a given signature, providing a
clear and manageable scope for evaluation. By focus-
ing on MBPP and HumanEval, we can systematically
explore our research questions in a controlled envi-
ronment where we can focus on TDD and its effects.
By establishing the effectiveness of TDD in LLM-based
code generation using these datasets, we lay the groundwork
for exploring more complex datasets focused on real-world
TDD data in future studies. Conversely, if TDD proves in-
effective with these benchmarks, it may indicate limited
applicability in this context. We utilized refined versions of
HumanEval and MBPP datasets curated by EvalPlus [ 18],
which adds additional tests to allow for a more rigorous
evaluation of the generated code.
• HumanEval: Contains 164 handwritten Python pro-
gramming problems. Each problem includes a function
signature, docstring, body, and several unit tests. The
EvalPlus variant we use includes additional unit tests
(80 times the original) for each of the 164 problems,
providing more extensive coverage and thorough test-
ing.
• MBPP: Comprises around 1,000 crowd-sourced Python
programming problems designed for entry-level pro-
grammers. Each problem includes a task description,
a code solution, and three automated test cases. The
version we use includes 35 times the original number
of unit tests for each problem. It consists of 399 tasks,
which are a subset of the original MBPP dataset. This
subset is selected by the authors of EvalPlus from the
sanitized MBPP (a set of 427 manually filtered by the
original MBPP authors), with further removal of low-
quality and ill-formed tasks for benchmark quality
control.
We never supply the LLM with any additional test cases
that EvalPlus added using dynamic program testing tech-
niques and only use them to test correctness. However, ex-
isting work in the literature has questioned the accuracy of
function-level benchmarks for evaluating LLMs [4, 21]. We
also look at file-level generation to address this concern and
validate our findings. For this, we curate our own dataset
of 1100 problems from a popular competitive programming
website, CodeChef, for the following reasons:
• We also wish to explore how difficulty impacts our
results, and existing datasets do not have a balanced
set of problems spanning various difficulty levels
• CodeContests v2 is not public, and the older dataset
is outdated and filled primarily with Python 2 solu-
tions and problems that no longer accept solutions
on the competitive programming platforms they were
extracted from

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
Noble Saji Mathews and Meiyappan Nagappan
Problem
Statement
Supplied
Tests
RQ4
Private Tests
Crash
Logs
Verifier
RQ3
Remediation
Agent
Generated
Code
Coder Agent
LLM
Remediation
Loop
RQ1 (Baseline): Code generation with
problem statement alone
RQ2 (Prompt + Test): Code generation
with problem statement and test cases
Iteration Limit: Loop "N" times or until
"M" repeated test failures for RQ3 
Agent Configuration
1 2
3.a
3.b
4
5
6
Figure 1. Overview of the evaluation pipeline
• APPS dataset, which is a more recent dataset of coding
challenge problems, does not give a clear difficulty
measure but rather categorizes problems into abstract
buckets, which doesn’t work well for our purposes
3.2 TGen Framework
Figure 1 provides an overview of the proposed TGen frame-
work’s pipeline, which we use for evaluation. Each part of
the pipeline is described below:
1. Input Phase: The evaluation pipeline starts by ac-
cepting two main inputs: the problem statement de-
scribing the task and the tests containing the public
unit tests and the required signature, if any, to be en-
forced in the desired solution. These tests serve both
as specifications for the code to meet and as a verifi-
cation tool for the output. These tests serve as both
specifications and verification tools. Tests provided to
the LLM during generation are labelled as supplied
tests, while the rest are private tests. For competitive
programming problems, the challenge description is
the problem statement, and available public tests are
supplied tests.
2. LLM Engine: The core reasoning engine, powered
by state-of-the-art LLMs (e.g., Meta Llama 3, GPT-3.5
& GPT-4 Turbo), processes the structured input. The
foundational model leverages its own knowledge and
any supplied context to generate an output response.
This study uses GPT-4 Turbo v1106 for all experiments,
with results validated using Meta Llama 3.
3. LLM Agents: In the context of Large Language Mod-
els (LLMs), "agents" are systems that utilize LLMs as
their underlying reasoning engine [3]. These agents
are designed with predefined prompts and thought
patterns, enabling them to interact intelligently with
users or other systems. Agents in our pipeline utilize
the intent and available context from the input phase
to guide the LLM engine in generating code, reviewing
snippets, and suggesting fixes.
a. Coder Agent: This agent takes the supplied infor-
mation and generates a code snippet from it. The
system prompt used when tests are supplied for
function-level generation cases is shown in Fig-
ure 2. The first part provides a rough thought pro-
cess to instruct the LLM on how to utilize the tests,
and the second part contains instructions specific
to the structure of tasks in a dataset. Though the
overall structure of the prompt remains the same,
variants of this are used in different cases, namely,
when no tests are supplied or when a file-level
generation task is performed.
b. Remediation Agent: This agent looks at failures
reported by the verifier and attempts to suggest
how to fix the code, which is then taken up by the
“Coder Agent” in the next iteration. The structure
of the prompts is shown in Figure 3.
4. Output Phase: The Generated Code is extracted from
the LLMs output, which is then subject to validation.
The output is expected to satisfy both the functional
requirements and the constraints imposed by the tests,
if any.
5. Verification: The output of the coder agent is always
run through the verifier that uses PyTest, a Python
unit-testing framework, to verify the generated code
against all available tests. The verifier collects crashes
or test failures and creates a comprehensive list of

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
Test-Driven Development for Code Generation
Your task is only to write a Python function to satisfy re-
quirements specified by the users Prompt.
Only generate a single complete Python code snippet. Start
generating after the [PYTHON] tag. Your python solution
should end with a [/PYTHON] tag.
| Multi-step prompting for case with tests supplied
1. Look at the "Prompt" and "Tests" provided to understand
the users requirements.
2. Generate code based on requirements in the prompt and
ensure the logic is such that it would pass the corresponding
tests provided.
3. Do not attempt to programmatically verify the tests. The
test should not be part of the generated code in any way.
4. Do not write code in order to satisfy the tests, primarily
focus on satisfying the prompt.
5. Include necessary imports in the generated code.
6. Your code is expected to read input from stdin and write
output to stdout as per the requirements in the prompt.
7. Define additional helper functions if needed
8. Your output should be as shown in the sample tests.
Ensure you do not return or print any additional information
that can cause the tests to fail.
| Dataset-specific guidelines for function-level case
If starting code is provided look at the issues mentioned and
attempt to fix them
Ensure that the signature of the function is the same as the
one provided by the user
And format your response as follows:
[PYTHON]
def function_name(parameters_as_provided_in_signature):
{
Ensure the function signature is the same as the one provided
in the signature
Infer meaning of parameters from the prompt and tests
Valid python code with necessary imports if any that satisfies
the prompt
Ensure the entry method is a function with the same name
as the function name in the tests
}
[/PYTHON]
Figure 2. Prompt used by the Coder Agent
failures for the LLM to inspect and address issues.
The verifier identifies any discrepancies and ensures
only correct solutions are accepted and returned to
the user.
System: You are an expert Python programmer, your job is
to look at code and reason why it doesn’t work as intended.
Once you reason why it doesn’t work, you will provide a
prompt that highlights the key points that need to be fixed in
the code. You will not write the code yourself. IMPORTANT:
Tests cannot be modified. Never make a suggestion outside
the scope of modifying the solution code snippet
Assistant: <Code Snippet under remediation>
User: This code is not correct as it led to the following issues:
<List of issues following test execution extracted by log-
analyzer>
Figure 3. Configuration of the Remediation Agent
6. Remediation Loop: The system enters a remediation
loop if the generated code fails the tests. The remedi-
ation agent uses failure information (e.g., stack trace,
detected issues, executed lines) to refine feedback for
the coder agent. This loop runs for a fixed number of
iterations or until the same tests fail repeatedly, show-
ing no progress. We limit the loop to five iterations
and three repeated failures for our experiments. We
observed that the remediation advice often becomes
repetitive beyond three to four iterations, yielding di-
minishing returns on further attempts to fix the code.
To conduct our experiments in a cost and compute-efficient
manner, our pipeline executes in the following fashion:
• Solved without tests: The first solution is attempted
with the problem statement alone and verified for
correctness
• Needs tests: If the problem statement alone fails to
generate a valid solution, the pipeline is rerun, supply-
ing all public tests along with the problem statement.
The newly generated code is then verified against all
tests
• Needs remediation: If the previous step results in
an invalid solution, the failure data is collected from
the verifier and the remediation loop is executed until
a correct solution is generated
• Unsolved: If the remediation loop exits without gen-
erating a valid solution, the problem is considered
unsolvable by TGen
We provide a replication package1, which includes output
and runtime details from TGen for all cases we experimented
with and code scripts for the experiments. Output from LLMs
is often unpredictable. We use a seed value of "1106" and a
temperature of 0 in our experiments to improve the replica-
bility of our results.
1https://osf.io/e3jy6/?view_only=bc67e33bebd3435abf5537d56767401d

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
Noble Saji Mathews and Meiyappan Nagappan
Figure 4. GPT4: Problems resolved and strategies used for
Function-level code generation benchmarks
4 IMPACT OF TDD IN CODE GENERATION
In this section, we seek to answer the “IF” question: Do tests
help the code generation process? We also manually explore
the data to assess the impact of tests and determine which
types of problems benefit from tests and which do not. The
fraction of correct solutions obtained following the afore-
mentioned workflow with GPT-4 Turbo version 1106 as the
LLM for the two function-level benchmark datasets MBPP
and HumanEval can be seen in Figure 4. RQs 1 through 4
break down these results further. Satisfying public tests is
considered the correctness criterion in RQs 1, 2 and 3. RQ4
dives into the notion of private tests and uncaptured require-
ments. We also manually investigate the data to highlight
key details and insights. Please note that we refer to spe-
cific cases within the dataset using the following notation
“Dataset/Key” where the key is a unique identifier for the
problem within the corresponding dataset.
4.1 How good is basic code generation?
GPT-4, being one of the most powerful LLMs available to-
day, does reasonably well solving 80.5% of MBPP problems
and an even higher 82.3% of HumanEval tasks, as shown
in Figure 4, both of which consist of function-level bench-
marks. Section 5.1 discusses file-level generation, which is
inherently more challenging, and also how using another
LLM affects these results. These numbers are slightly lower
than have been reported for GPT-4 Turbo v1106 in popular
LLM coding benchmark leaderboards [18] by about 5%. The
drop in performance might be attributed to the removal of
sample test cases if present in the problem statement for
this experiment and differences in the prompt and model
parameters like seed and temperature.
4.2 Does providing test cases improve code
generation?
For MBPP and HumanEval, including tests contributes to
solving an additional 12.0% and 8.5% of problems, respec-
tively, showcasing that tests as part of the input help the
LLM reach the correct solution. These percentages corre-
spond to an additional 51 problems in the MBPP dataset and
15 additional problems in the HumanEval dataset. Manually
inspecting the results of the evaluation with and without
tests, several key insights emerged:
• Problems where the initial implementation had
correct logic but incorrect function signatures :
benefited from tests as they helped identify mismatches
and ensure adherence to the required function signa-
tures (e.g., MBPP/6, MBPP/90, MBPP/233).
• Problems involving mathematical formulas or
geometric calculations saw improvements as tests
helped catch errors in formula application and ensured
the correct implementation of mathematical logic (e.g.,
MBPP/14, MBPP/430).
• Problems requiring precise string manipulations
or regular expressions benefited from tests high-
lighting edge cases and incorrect pattern matching,
leading to more robust solutions (e.g., MBPP/16, Hu-
manEval/48).
• Problems involving complex data structures such
as nested dictionaries or tuples. Tests helped ensure
that the functions correctly handled various input
formats and edge cases. (e.g., MBPP/106, MBPP/299)
• Edge Case Handling: Many problems initially failed
due to unhandled edge cases. Tests were instrumental
in identifying these edge cases, prompting the system
to refine its logic to handle all possible scenarios (e.g.,
MBPP/170, HumanEval/5).
• Problems requiring specific algorithmic approaches,
such as finding the maximum difference or sorting
criteria, benefited from tests that guided the system
to correct logical flaws and align with the problem
requirements (e.g., MBPP/63, HumanEval/127).
LLMs seem to be able to improve their understanding of
the requirements presented in the problem statement us-
ing the provided tests. The tests also seem to have played
a significant role in validating mathematical logic, ensur-
ing the correct application of formulas to produce results
indicated by the tests. Tests also seem to prompt the sys-
tem to refine its logic to accommodate a broader range of
inputs and edge cases. Consistency in data types, especially
in output formats, was another area where tests highlighted
discrepancies. In some cases, adding tests led to simplify-
ing logic, replacing initial complex approaches presumably
derived from misunderstanding the statement with more
straightforward solutions.

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
Test-Driven Development for Code Generation
4.3 Can failed tests help LLMs fix their mistakes?
The remediation loop’s role as a corrective mechanism can
also be observed, with further improvements noted in problem-
solving. For MBPP and HumanEval, the loop seems to ef-
fectively refine the code, with an additional 2.8% and 3% of
problems solved, respectively. This corresponds to the cor-
rect code for 21 additional problems for MBPP, out of which
11 were remediated in the first attempt, seven on the second,
two on the third and one on the fourth. For the HumanEval
dataset, nine additional problems were solved correctly, of
which seven were remediated on the first attempt and one
each was remediated on the second and third attempts. It
should be noted that in our evaluation pipeline, we allowed
for up to five remediation attempts. Although a few cases
utilized all five attempts, none were solved. Manually inspect-
ing the data, we find the following cases that are benefited
by remediation:
• Edge Case Handling: Many problems initially failed
due to inadequate handling of edge cases. Remedia-
tion loops allowed the system to incorporate specific
checks for these cases, leading to correct code genera-
tion (e.g., MBPP/92, MBPP/113, MBPP/137)
• Issues related to data type handling and logical
errors were effectively addressed through remedia-
tion loops (e.g., MBPP/115, HumanEval/22)
• Problems requiring precise mathematical com-
putations saw significant improvements through re-
mediation. Initial attempts often failed due to issues
like integer vs. floating-point division, but remedia-
tion advice helped correct these errors (e.g., MBPP/300,
HumanEval/77)
• Problems involving text manipulation , such as
punctuation handling, benefited greatly from remedia-
tion loops. Initial attempts often failed due to improper
handling of punctuation, but iterative refinements led
to progressively better solutions (e.g., MBPP/7)
• Problems requiring multiple remediation attempts
highlight the importance of iterative refinement. Er-
rors with boundary checks, simple arithmetic correc-
tions, or basic input validation were often resolved
through iterative remediation. Each attempt built on
the previous one, incorporating new insights and cor-
rections until the correct solution was achieved (e.g.,
MBPP/160, HumanEval/57)
The general trajectory from initial to final remediation
attempts involved a progressive refinement process. In most
cases, the first remediation led to basic fixes and the handling
of straightforward errors highlighted by the crashes. This
often addressed the most obvious errors, such as missing
imports or missing type conversions. In the case of a sec-
ond remediation attempt, more detailed adjustments were
involved, addressing deeper logical issues and additional
edge cases. A few examples of cases remediation attempts
to fix are adjusting modulo operations to map to the correct
character range, correcting base cases and loop logic in re-
cursive functions, and handling edge cases like empty arrays
or specific input formats.
The remediation agent did not have access to the history
to prevent the context length of the models from being ex-
ceeded during the evaluation, which means the LLM could
not review past fixes. There were cases where the remedi-
ation advice misled the generator and often failed to fully
implement the remediation advice, leading to repeated er-
rors. We ignore cases like MBPP/462 and HumanEval/145,
which occurred due to verifier and environment-related is-
sues, as these are limitations of the evaluator as implemented
presently. An interesting question is what kind of problems
remain unsolved, manually inspecting we find the following:
• Misunderstanding core logic or requirements of-
ten led to persistent errors across multiple remediation
attempts (e.g., MBPP/83, HumanEval/38, MBPP/138,
HumanEval/83, MBPP/765).
• Handling specific data structures like empty ar-
rays, negative numbers, nested lists, and tuples re-
mained challenging despite multiple iterations (e.g.,
MBPP/119, MBPP/559, MBPP/431, MBPP/630).
• Logical errors and inadequate adaptation of re-
mediation advice were common. Despite following
remediation advice, the system consistently produced
incorrect logic in cases such as rotating binary strings,
renaming functions, and counting and pairing differ-
ing bits often led to repeated mistakes (e.g., MBPP/109,
MBPP/468, MBPP/126, MBPP/595).
• Misinterpreting input/output formats and com-
plex cases involving multiple conditions or constraints
frequently caused failures. These included handling
nested list inputs and incorrectly handling the input
format for date validation (e.g., MBPP/278, MBPP/427,
MBPP/102, MBPP/581).
• Performance bottlenecks and inefficiencies were
encountered, particularly with large inputs and com-
plex logic, leading to timeouts and overly complex
solutions (e.g., MBPP/765, HumanEval/63).
4.4 Do the generated solutions only satisfy the
supplied tests or even unseen tests?
An interesting question in our study is whether the generated
solutions are tailored merely to pass the provided tests or
if they are robust enough to succeed against unseen tests
as well. This question becomes particularly pertinent when
considering the potential for omitted requirements in the
supplied test cases. While TDD advocates for the use of tests
as the primary specifications, the risk of overlooking certain
criteria due to suboptimal test quality cannot be ignored.
For the MBPP and HumanEval datasets, we employed
their EvalPlus [18] enriched variants with 35x and 80x more

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
Noble Saji Mathews and Meiyappan Nagappan
Table 1. Impact of private tests on GPT-4 based TGen results with improvement offered by tests after validation highlighted
Category MBPP(#399) HumanEval(#164) CodeChef(#1100)
Solved without tests 69.67% 78.66% 23.00%
Needs tests 82.45% (+12.78%) 87.81% (+9.15%) 26.09% (+3.09%)
Needs remediation 87.71% (+5.26%) 93.30% (+5.49%) 30.27% (+4.18%)
Unsolved 12.28% 6.71% 69.73%
Improvement using tests 18.04% 14.64% 7.27%
tests, respectively, offering a rigorous assessment platform.
EvalPlus seeds its test generator with high-quality inputs
and extends them through type-aware mutation to establish
a robust framework for evaluating the true correctness of
LLM-synthesized code.
Our extended evaluation of the generated code utilizing
private tests, summarized in the first two columns of Table 1,
indicates that including public tests still results in improved
performance across benchmarks. Even though there is a
reduction in the number of problems solved corresponding
to each category once verified, the addition of public tests
yielded a performance increase of 12.78% for MBPP and 9.15%
for HumanEval. Further application of remediation loops led
to additional improvements: 5.26% for MBPP and 5.49% for
HumanEval. This demonstrates that even without the LLM
having access to the comprehensive test suites provided
by EvalPlus, including some tests, it aids in enhancing the
correctness of the generated solutions over not using tests.
The occurrence of failures in some solutions when sub-
jected to private tests highlights a crucial point: the more
exhaustive the test suites are, the better the results tend to
be. Our findings reveal that solutions developed with test
information fare well against private tests, underscoring the
benefits of integrating tests in the code generation process
to bolster robustness. This effectiveness points to a nuanced
balance: while incorporating tests, even partially comprehen-
sive ones, bolsters solution robustness, the ultimate success
hinges on the quality of these tests. Having a wide variety
of tests ensures solutions are not just tailored to meet the
explicit criteria in the problem statement but are also able to
capture implicit requirements.
5 PARAMETERS AFFECTING TDD
In this section, we explore the “HOW” question: how do
different parameters impact the effectiveness of tests in code
generation? We aim to understand the influence of prob-
lem difficulty, the number of tests, and the LLM itself. RQs
5 through 7 address these aspects in detail. RQ5 examines
how problem difficulty affects code generation results. RQ6
investigates the optimal number of tests needed for effective
code generation. RQ7 evaluates whether the results hold
when using an open model like Llama 3 as the reasoning
engine. This section builds on the findings from Section 4,
Figure 5. Problems resolved and strategies used compared
across difficulty levels using GPT4
providing a deeper understanding of the factors that influ-
ence the success of integrating TDD with LLM-based code
generation.
5.1 How does problem difficulty affect these results?
5.1.1 Data collection. We curated a problem set of coding
problems from CodeChef and their corresponding human
solutions. CodeChef assigns each problem on its platform
a difficulty score and classifies ranges of difficulties into 11
buckets, as depicted in Table 2. To ensure that our study’s
problem set has a good distribution with respect to diffi-
culty, we fetched the 100 most popular problems from each
difficulty level. Here, popularity refers to the number of ac-
cepted solution attempts that existed when the data was
scraped (November 2023). The curated multi-level dataset of
1100 problems represents a spectrum of real-world coding
challenges of varied difficulties that require full program
synthesis.
5.1.2 Results. A breakup of the problems and solution
strategies is shown in Figure 5. The data shown can be sum-
marized as 35.72% (393) problems solved without providing
tests, 7.72% (85) additional problems solved with public tests
being supplied to the LLM, and another 9.36% (103) prob-
lems solved using the LLM to look into validation issues
and remediating the code. In contrast to function-level gen-
eration, where we can expect the function signature and
input and output schemes to be straightforward, file-level

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
Test-Driven Development for Code Generation
Table 2. Difficulty Levels of Selected CodeChef Problems
Level Range Count
Beginner 0 - 999 100
1* Beginner 1000 - 1199 100
1* Advanced 1200 - 1399 100
2* Beginner 1400 - 1499 100
2* Advanced 1500 - 1599 100
3* Beginner 1600 - 1699 100
3* Advanced 1700 - 1799 100
4* 1800 - 1999 100
5* 2000 - 2199 100
6* 2200 - 2499 100
7* 2500 - 5000 100
1100
generation, as required for the curated CodeChef dataset,
allows for more flexibility in problem-solving approaches.
This flexibility can make CodeChef problems harder to solve,
even without considering task complexity. Performance on
the CodeChef dataset is markedly lower, with success rates
sharply decreasing as problem difficulty escalates. Despite
this, 35.72% of these problems were solved correctly with
just the problem statement. This highlights the challenges as-
sociated with these problems as compared to function-level
generation datasets we have explored so far. We need to parse
the input correctly and provide the output to the console in
the expected format, apart from the logical complexity of
the tasks.
Providing test cases led to a consistent increase in the num-
ber of problems solved across difficulty levels, increasing the
total number of problems solved by 7.72%. This underscores
the importance of test cases in aiding code generation across
all difficulty levels.
Remediation loops further enhance performance in the
CodeChef dataset, with an improvement of 9.36%. This indi-
cates the LLM’s capacity for self-improvement and its ability
to tackle increasingly sophisticated challenges, particularly
for medium-difficulty problems. The complexities associated
with correctly handling input and output operations likely
contribute to the higher impact of remediation on full pro-
gram synthesis required for CodeChef tasks. Most of the
CodeChef problems (47.18% or 519 problems) remained un-
solved in our testing configurations. Allowing more remedi-
ation attempts could potentially improve these numbers, but
our experiments show diminishing returns with increased
iterations.
We consider private tests for additional validation to gauge
the impact of supplied tests. These tests, not disclosed be-
forehand, are used by grading systems on platforms like
Figure 6. Distribution of difficulty levels associated with
problems solved by each strategy
CodeChef to determine correctness. We leveraged these pri-
vate test suites to evaluate the generated solutions by eval-
uating the solutions on the platform itself. The results can
be seen in the last column of Table 1. We note that we still
observe a 7.27% improvement in the correctness of solutions
across the dataset comprising 1100 problems.
Our analysis, as illustrated in Figure 6, delves into the re-
lationship between problem difficulty and the success rate of
generated solutions. The data reveals a clear trend: simpler
problems tend to be solved effectively using tests alone, while
more complex problems often require additional remedia-
tion for successful resolution. Notably, the most challenging
problems remained unsolved, indicating a direct correlation
between problem difficulty and the likelihood of resolution
through our current methodological framework. We see that
a much less expensive operation of supplying tests quite
significantly impacts the fraction of solved problems.
Lastly, the discrepancy observed between the success of
solutions on public tests versus their failure on CodeChef’s
private tests raises important concerns. Our analysis of dif-
ficulty scores for problems that failed only on private tests
yielded an average score of 1627.75, situating these prob-
lems within the medium difficulty range. The performance
of GPT-4 generated solutions on these tests, where 16 were
partially accepted, two caused judge errors, six resulted in
runtime errors, and 25 exceeded time limits—underscores
the necessity of comprehensive testing. These findings high-
light the importance of developing more robust tests that
can anticipate and mitigate such issues despite efficiency not
being the primary focus of this investigation.
5.2 How many tests is good enough?
The number of test cases available per problem varies widely
across both function-level generation benchmarks. Consid-
ering the scope of our study, we choose to include only the

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
Noble Saji Mathews and Meiyappan Nagappan
Figure 7. Correctness with increasing number of tests sup-
plied
human-written tests in these datasets and not those gener-
ated by EvalPlus. To explore the impact of the number of
these tests supplied to the LLM, we work with a subset of
both datasets so that as we vary the number of tests, we
are still commenting on the correctness observed for the
same set of problems. The cutoffs are picked so that we have
enough cases to analyze while not dropping too many prob-
lems from our analysis. For MBPP, we look at the subset of
problems with at least three tests, resulting in 398 problems,
and only one case is removed. For HumanEval, we look for
cases with at least 4 tests, leaving us with 143 problems out
of the initial 164.
We run the evaluation pipeline without remediation for
each case in these subsets and repeat the experiment while
increasing the number of tests supplied. The variation in
the fraction of correct solutions generated in each case is
shown in Figure 7. We see that the impact varies across the
datasets, but we see an upward trend in both cases as more
tests are added. However, we do not observe a plateau in
the case of HumanEval, which might be attributed to the
simpler nature of problems in MBPP, which seem to suffer
more from vagueness than complexity. Also, we note from
our experiments that as we continue increasing the number
of tests, in some cases, we end up with incorrect code being
generated that had been correctly solved before. This could
be because of the “lost in the middle” problem reported in
the literature, where the LLM starts ignoring context in the
middle as more and more information is supplied to the
model.
Additionally, we look at the sample solution to each of the
problems included in the datasets and use it to compute line
coverage contributed by each test case. We note that 75% of
the cases in HumanEval and 92.4% of cases in MBPP achieve
100% coverage with the addition of the first case itself. This
could be another reason why the curve for MBPP is starting
to decline with just three tests. We need a better dataset with
Figure 8. Llama 3: Problems resolved and strategies used for
Function-level code generation benchmarks
more human-written test cases for more rigorous analysis,
but we hypothesize, based on our results, that adding more
diverse test cases aids in the code generation process.
5.3 Do these results hold with an open model like
Llama 3?
Apart from GPT-4 Turbo, we also experimented with GPT-
3.5 Turbo v1106 and observed similar trends. However, in
our discussion so far, we presented only results from GPT-4,
as it represents one of the most powerful LLMs available for
public use. An interesting question is whether the benefits of
TDD can be seen outside OpenAI’s GPT family of models. To
address this question, we pick Meta Llama 3 70B Instruct, an-
other popular model that shows promise for code generation,
ranking among the best models in code [9, 18] and non-code
LLM benchmark leaderboards [7]. The output from TGen for
GPT-3.5 Turbo is also included in our replication package.
The results observed by replacing GPT-4 with Llama 3
in the evaluation pipeline can be seen in Figure 8. We see
that the trends observed with proprietary models extend
to open models. Code generation using Llama 3 benefits
from the additional tests and remediation setup provided by
TGen, and we even see a greater impact than we observed
with GPT-4. As compared to GPT-4, which had over 80% of
the problems being solved in the baseline, we see a lower
performance of 52.6% and 67.7% in MBPP and HumanEval
benchmarks, respectively. Despite the worse code generation
performance out of the box, we note that the addition of tests
and remediation both significantly improve the results.
The final measure of improvements observed after evaluat-
ing the correctness of generated solutions using the EvalPlus
can be seen in Table 3. We see that after validating the solu-
tions on private tests, we see a 38.6% improvement in MBPP
and a 21.95% improvement in HumanEval as compared to
their respective baselines, which is almost double the im-
provement we saw in the case of GPT-4 shown in Table 1.

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
Test-Driven Development for Code Generation
Table 3. Impact of private tests on Llama 3 based TGen
results with improvement offered by tests after validation
highlighted
Category MBPP(#399) HumanEval(#164)
Solved without tests 46.37% 62.20%
Needs tests 75.94% (+29.57%) 75.61% (+13.41%)
Needs remediation 84.96% (+9.02%) 84.15% (+8.54%)
Unsolved 15.04% 15.85%
Improvement 38.60% 21.95%
6 RELATED WORK
Evaluating code generation performance is an area that
is being actively explored. Liu et al. ’s EvalPlus [ 18] pro-
poses rigorous benchmark enhancements for evaluating
LLM-generated code’s functional correctness, highlighting
the insufficiency of current benchmarks in depth and breadth.
Ding et al. present CrossCodeEval [ 8], which challenges
LLMs with multilingual, cross-file context code completion.
Jimenez et al. ’s SWE-bench [13] uses real-world GitHub is-
sues to test LLMs, with results showing current models solve
only a fraction of problems.
Improving code generation using tests has emerged
as a popular trend among other works that have explored
other methods, such as improving the reasoning ability of
LLMs by using diverse prompts, voting, and other reason-
ing verification strategies apart from tests [17]. Wang et al.
employ test execution feedback while training the model to
enable the model itself to discern incorrect code [26]. Chen et
al. ’s Codex [6] demonstrates the limitations of single-sample
code generation and suggests that one could similarly exploit
multiple test iterations to refine code quality. There have also
been attempts at making compilable code by incorporating
feedback from compilers [27]. Shinn et al. ’s Reflexion [23]
method allows agents to learn from past mistakes, empha-
sizing the need for approaches that can iterate over code
generation and testing for improved decision-making in soft-
ware development. Recent agentic systems like Yuntong et
al. ’s AutoCodeRover have also explored utilizing test cases
for spectrum-based fault localization when retrieving con-
text for code generation [30]. However, most of these explore
the problem in a program repair setting.
Generating tests is another way tests for code genera-
tion are being explored recently [ 22]. Lever [20] attempts
to rank generations based on trained verifiers derived from
the prompt. A comprehensive exploration is presented by
Codet, where they assess the quality of generated test cases
and their impact [5]. Lahiri et al. [14] explore the use of test
cases for user intent formalization, but they rely on developer
feedback for mutating and ranking test and code suggestions
effectively using generated tests. Fakhoury et al. build upon
this by leveraging user feedback through LLM-generated
tests to improve the correctness of generated code [10].
The aforementioned works showcase the potential for us-
ing verification and validation techniques to improve the
performance of LLMs across different complexity levels and
tasks. Further, they also hint at the efficacy of using LLMs for
program repair through feedback-based techniques. None of
these studies, however, answers key questions surrounding
the impact of including human-written test information and
how these mechanisms can be employed in a test-driven
workflow. We wish to bridge this gap and structure our ex-
periments to explore how to use tests efficiently and how
test-driven development principles can be used to improve
code generation.
7 THREATS TO V ALIDITY
Prompt engineering, while a powerful tool to guide LLMs, is
also subject to limitations. Poorly designed prompts can lead
to sub-optimal results, skewing the model’s results and po-
tentially misleading it. To minimize this, we keep the prompt
structure consistent across our experiments and vary only
the parameters under consideration. Using popular bench-
mark datasets, such as MBPP and HumanEval, has inherent
limitations. These benchmarks do not capture the full com-
plexity and variability of real-world programming problems
but help shed light on the impact of tests. We also use our
own dataset of problems with a clear notion of difficulty, but
this might not be representative of the difficulty of tasks in
software engineering.
Our assumption that test runs serve as ground truths for
the corresponding problems may not always hold, partic-
ularly for non-deterministic problems. We excluded such
problems from our curated dataset and filtered out errors
through manual inspection. Recent literature also suggests
that the tests used in widely adopted benchmarks may not
be robust enough for evaluating code generation. To address
this, we used the refined versions of the HumanEval and
MBPP datasets curated by EvalPlus [18], which include addi-
tional tests for more thorough evaluation. The performance
of TDD with LLMs might vary with different models, archi-
tectures, or training data. Further, the inherent variability
in LLM outputs can introduce inconsistencies. We employ
a fixed seed value and temperature setting to improve the
reproducibility of our results, but some degree of unpre-
dictability remains.
8 CONCLUSION
In the rapidly evolving landscape of LLMs for code, where
these models are being increasingly used for code genera-
tion and remediation, embracing TDD emerges as a strategic
paradigm shift. TDD enables us to use tests in the generation
phase and for validation. By incorporating test cases and
employing remediation loops, we are able to solve complex
problems that the LLM cannot solve normally. Using GPT-4,
we observe a significant increase in the correctness of the

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
Noble Saji Mathews and Meiyappan Nagappan
code generated. We find that this improvement is more pro-
nounced for less performant models that can only solve a
much lower fraction of problems initially. We also highlight
the cases in which these approaches work well and the kind
of tasks that present-day LLMs struggle with. Our experi-
ments with GPT-4 and Llama 3 show that merely providing
the LLM with tests during generation improves correctness
by 9.15 to 29.57%. Adding remediation loops results in an
additional gain of 5.26 to 9.02% across popular function-level
benchmark datasets after rigorous evaluation with private
tests. We also find that the proposed approach improves cor-
rectness by 7.27% on our dataset of 1100 file-level generation
tasks where GPT-4 performs poorly and struggles with more
difficult problems. Our findings validate the impact of tests,
and we therefore advocate for the widespread adoption of
test-driven methodologies to maximize the benefits of LLMs
in code generation.
References
[1] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk
Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry,
Quoc Le, et al. 2021. Program synthesis with large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 (2021).
[2] Kent Beck. 2022. Test driven development: By example. Addison-Wesley
Professional.
[3] Vasili Braga. 2023. Decentralised autonomous society through large
language models’ based agents: a pathway to empower small commu-
nities. Journal of Engineering Sciences 3 (2023), 88–120.
[4] Federico Cassano, John Gouwar, Daniel Nguyen, Sydney Nguyen,
Luna Phipps-Costin, Donald Pinckney, Ming-Ho Yee, Yangtian Zi,
Carolyn Jane Anderson, Molly Q Feldman, et al. 2023. MultiPL-E: a
scalable and polyglot approach to benchmarking neural code genera-
tion. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2023).
[5] Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-
Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. Codet: Code generation with
generated tests. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10397 (2022).
[6] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde
de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas
Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large language models
trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[7] Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas An-
gelopoulos, Tianle Li, Dacheng Li, Hao Zhang, Banghua Zhu, Michael
Jordan, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al . 2024. Chatbot arena: An open
platform for evaluating llms by human preference. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.04132 (2024).
[8] Yangruibo Ding, Zijian Wang, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Hantian Ding,
Ming Tan, Nihal Jain, Murali Krishna Ramanathan, Ramesh Nallapati,
Parminder Bhatia, Dan Roth, et al. 2023. CrossCodeEval: A Diverse
and Multilingual Benchmark for Cross-File Code Completion. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.11248 (2023).
[9] Xueying Du, Mingwei Liu, Kaixin Wang, Hanlin Wang, Junwei Liu,
Yixuan Chen, Jiayi Feng, Chaofeng Sha, Xin Peng, and Yiling Lou. 2024.
Evaluating large language models in class-level code generation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software
Engineering. 1–13.
[10] Sarah Fakhoury, Aaditya Naik, Georgios Sakkas, Saikat Chakraborty,
and Shuvendu K Lahiri. 2024. LLM-based Test-driven Interactive
Code Generation: User Study and Empirical Evaluation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.10100 (2024).
[11] Gordon Fraser, Matt Staats, Phil McMinn, Andrea Arcuri, and Frank
Padberg. 2015. Does automated unit test generation really help soft-
ware testers? a controlled empirical study. ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 24, 4 (2015), 1–49.
[12] Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika,
Akul Arora, Ethan Guo, Collin Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He,
Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring Coding Challenge
Competence With APPS. NeurIPS (2021).
[13] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin
Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. SWE-bench: Can
Language Models Resolve Real-World GitHub Issues? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.06770 (2023).
[14] Shuvendu K Lahiri, Aaditya Naik, Georgios Sakkas, Piali Choudhury,
Curtis von Veh, Madanlal Musuvathi, Jeevana Priya Inala, Cheng-
long Wang, and Jianfeng Gao. 2022. Interactive code generation via
test-driven user-intent formalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05950
(2022).
[15] Caroline Lemieux, Jeevana Priya Inala, Shuvendu K Lahiri, and Sid-
dhartha Sen. 2023. Codamosa: Escaping coverage plateaus in test
generation with pre-trained large language models. In 2023 IEEE/ACM
45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE,
919–931.
[16] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrit-
twieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno,
Agustin Dal Lago, et al . 2022. Competition-level code generation
with alphacode. Science 378, 6624 (2022), 1092–1097.
[17] Yifei Li, Zeqi Lin, Shizhuo Zhang, Qiang Fu, Bei Chen, Jian-Guang Lou,
and Weizhu Chen. 2023. Making language models better reasoners
with step-aware verifier. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) .
5315–5333.
[18] Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Lingming Zhang.
2024. Is your code generated by chatgpt really correct? rigorous
evaluation of large language models for code generation. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
[19] Michael R Lyu, Baishakhi Ray, Abhik Roychoudhury, Shin Hwei Tan,
and Patanamon Thongtanunam. 2024. Automatic Programming: Large
Language Models and Beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02213 (2024).
[20] Ansong Ni, Srini Iyer, Dragomir Radev, Veselin Stoyanov, Wen-tau
Yih, Sida Wang, and Xi Victoria Lin. 2023. Lever: Learning to verify
language-to-code generation with execution. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning . PMLR, 26106–26128.
[21] Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat,
Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin,
et al. 2023. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.12950 (2023).
[22] Max Schäfer, Sarah Nadi, Aryaz Eghbali, and Frank Tip. 2023. An
empirical evaluation of using large language models for automated
unit test generation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2023).
[23] Noah Shinn, Beck Labash, and Ashwin Gopinath. 2023. Reflexion: an
autonomous agent with dynamic memory and self-reflection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.11366 (2023).
[24] Claudio Spiess, David Gros, Kunal Suresh Pai, Michael Pradel,
Md Rafiqul Islam Rabin, Susmit Jha, Prem Devanbu, and Toufique
Ahmed. 2024. Quality and Trust in LLM-generated Code. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.02047 (2024).
[25] Yuvraj Virk, Premkumar Devanbu, and Toufique Ahmed. 2024. En-
hancing Trust in LLM-Generated Code Summaries with Calibrated
Confidence Scores. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.19318 (2024).
[26] Xin Wang, Xiao Liu, Pingyi Zhou, Qixia Liu, Jin Liu, Hao Wu, and
Xiaohui Cui. 2022. Test-Driven Multi-Task Learning with Functionally
Equivalent Code Transformation for Neural Code Generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering. 1–6.

===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
Test-Driven Development for Code Generation
[27] Xin Wang, Yasheng Wang, Yao Wan, Fei Mi, Yitong Li, Pingyi Zhou,
Jin Liu, Hao Wu, Xin Jiang, and Qun Liu. 2022. Compilable neural code
generation with compiler feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05132
(2022).
[28] Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. 2022.
Large language models are reasoners with self-verification. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.09561 (2022).
[29] Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao,
Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. 2023. Repocoder: Repository-level
code completion through iterative retrieval and generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.12570 (2023).
[30] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury.
2024. AutoCodeRover: Autonomous Program Improvement. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.05427 (2024).